           remote sensing
Article
An Integrated Approach to 3D Web Visualization of
Cultural Heritage Heterogeneous Datasets
Argyro-Maria Boutsi *, Charalabos Ioannidis and Sofia Soile
 School of Rural and Survey Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, 15780 Zografou, Greece;
 cioannid@survey.ntua.gr (C.I.); soile.sofia@gmail.com (S.S.)
 * Correspondence: iboutsi@mail.ntua.gr; Tel.: +30-210-772685
                                                                                                    
 Received: 30 September 2019; Accepted: 24 October 2019; Published: 26 October 2019                 


 Abstract: The evolution of the high-quality 3D archaeological representations from niche products to
 integrated online media has not yet been completed. Digital archives of the field often lack multimodal
 data interoperability, user interaction and intelligibility. A web-based cultural heritage archive that
 compensates for these issues is presented in this paper. The multi-resolution 3D models constitute the
 core of the visualization on top of which supportive documentation data and multimedia content are
 spatial and logical connected. Our holistic approach focuses on the dynamic manipulation of the 3D
 scene through the development of advanced navigation mechanisms and information retrieval tools.
 Users parse the multi-modal content in a geo-referenced way through interactive annotation systems
 over cultural points of interest and automatic narrative tours. Multiple 3D and 2D viewpoints are
 enabled in real-time to support data inspection. The implementation exploits front-end programming
 languages, 3D graphic libraries and visualization frameworks to handle efficiently the asynchronous
 operations and preserve the initial assets’ accuracy. The choice of Greece’s Meteora, UNESCO world
 site, as a case study accounts for the platform’s applicability to complex geometries and large-scale
 historical environments.

 Keywords: 3D visualization; interactivity; data retrieval; ‘structure from motion photogrammetry;
 remote sensing archaeology; cultural heritage




1. Introduction
      Virtual reality, 3D graphics and digitized objects no longer require any expensive equipment or
specialized hardware to be visualized. Their almost ubiquitous presence on the web has contributed to
the comprehension of the third dimension by a wider audience. Exploiting users’ familiarization, the
most prominent assets of the cultural heritage field are currently on the spotlight. Tangible heritage 3D
models are of immense value, not only to the domain experts, but to anyone that can recognize their
natural and cultural particularities. The distinctiveness of the represented object cannot be disputed or
misinterpreted. Its inherited communicability reveals the cross-disciplinary information that lies to the
aim of its digitation; geometric documentation, diagnosis and monitoring, conservation, natural disaster
risk assessment, etc. [1]. The collaborative nature of these projects is enhanced as the 3D representations
are common ground among the involved parts (professionals, researchers, institutions, organizations)
for integrating and synthesizing various different approaches, methodologies and practices. Therefore,
the perspective of their publication and online deployment covers a wider spectrum of applications for
the cultural heritage community. It permits remote access, real-time co-operation, content updating and
outward-looking policies. Especially when the supportive documentation data and textual information
are appended to the visualization, the potential of transdisciplinary is maximized. The multi-level
correlation of 3D and 2D cultural data elucidates technical assumptions and meanings, outlines the
research findings and depicts the outcomes. For instance, it facilitates comparative surveys regarding


Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508; doi:10.3390/rs11212508                       www.mdpi.com/journal/remotesensing
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                         2 of 26



seismic vulnerability or climate change impact to historical buildings by highlighting geometrical
or structural changes [2]. Non-experts also profit from the openness of such projects and the reuse
of cultural heritage information in 3D reconstructions, animations, virtual museums and narratives
with multimedia content [3]. The actual potential landscape is expanded with search and retrieval
services, contextualizing of digital resources and user interaction strategies. The most prominent efforts
encompass partnerships among institutions, organizations and professional associations for digital
libraries, 3D archives and organized repositories, such as CyArk, Europeana and Open Heritage 3D [4,5].
Research projects and individual scientific initiatives have also demonstrated pioneer work within these
objectives. The Archaeo framework embraces collaborative research by publishing online ongoing field
work documentation. Segmented 3D models of an archaeological site and its findings are embedded
to a high-end 3D viewer and correlated with 2D GIS vector data and textual information derived by
a MySQL database [6]. A multi-purpose platform is developed to promote the site of Nora and the
Sanctuary of Aesculapius by University of Padova and 3DOM research group. It includes semantically
enriched point-cloud visualization, a 2,5D WebGIS viewer and embedded photogrammetric 3D models
of the sites’ artifacts for a scalable, interactive and contextual presentation [7].
     Besides relevant seminal implementations in heritage datasets, the great abundance of related
frameworks, platforms and applications can be misleading. Achieving a balance between 3D qualified
displays and integrated advanced functionalities remains a challenge. Emphasizing to geometrically
precise point clouds and meshes, they are the outreach of emerging methods (computer vision, reverse
engineering, digital photogrammetry), cutting-edge technology (LiDAR, laser-scanners, UAVs) and
spontaneous research. As their accuracy, size and complexity increase, so inadequate to manage them
are the current technologies. Moreover, only a few can be considered as conclusive regarding the
interactive, instructive and multidimensional aspect of the visualization.
     Such a centralized approach involves two main issues. Each factor of the problem is subject to its
own commitments and sets specific constrains and difficulties. The first one concerns the process of
rendering and displaying 3D content and therefore, the techniques and means of managing efficiently
the third dimension. In the context of the current work, the open-source software 3D Heritage Online
Presenter (3DHOP) and Three.js 3D graphics library undertake this heavy computation task along with
their underlying streaming and rendering technologies (Nexus.js, WebGL API etc.). The interactive
integration and coordination of the different data in a dynamic website is the second factor and the
main subject to be addressed in this article. We have developed an online visualization platform
oriented to large-scale archaeological sites and complex historical assets. Our approach surpasses
built-in features and basic paradigms leveraging JavaScript and WebGL for maximum customization
of the 3D environment. It is developed based on the following principles:
     Compliance with the principles of 3D Cultural Heritage archives
     Facilitation of 3D scene navigation and investigation of the supplementary documentation with
new tools to both experts and simple users
     Modification, extension and testing of the 3DHOP and Three.js codebases
     Development of spatial and logical relations based on data interoperability across different
collections and viewpoints
     Client-side architecture for optimal performance and responsiveness
     Sophisticated design and user-friendly Graphical User Interface (GUI)
     In particular, the overall aim is met by introducing these new tools and features:
     Interactive retrieval of multimedia information (3D models, images and text) from the 3D scene
while freely exploring it
     Automatic navigation to predefined positions of the scene with brief descriptions for a narrative
and comprehensive experience
     Annotations and text labels applied on points of interest of 3D models for semantic enrichment
     Concurrent visualization of 3D models of different level of detail, scale and format
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                        3 of 26



     Handling 3D models by assigning JavaScript functions directly to source code and scripting based
on their inherent properties
     Normalization of event model using jQuery library.
      The complete visualization infrastructure is implemented and assessed upon the archaeological
site of Meteora, an area greater than 10 km2 . The input data (3D models, ortho-photo maps and
various image collections) are part of the 3D geometric documentation of the site, conducted by the
Laboratory of Photogrammetry, National Technical University of Athens, Greece. The remainder
of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews existing solutions and their earlier related
initiatives to reveal literature gaps or shortcomings. Section 3 elucidates the main aspects of the
problem, and introduces the proposed methodology and system’s structure. The subsequent Section
demonstrates the case study and the input data along with their acquisition and processing pipeline.
In Section 5, the implementation process and its results are analyzed, including the design of the
graphical user interface and the development of advanced tools and features. Finally, Section 6 evaluates
the performance of the web platform by examining factors like loading times and network load.

2. Related Work
     Focusing on the rendering and visualization pipeline, the current development platforms with
corresponding implementations are presented and evaluated in this section. For consistency purposes
we only report the works that followed photogrammetric methods for data collection and processing
in the context of 3D geometric documentations. Along with a brief description of compression and
streaming techniques, the paper’s contribution is highlighted and the choice of 3DHOP and Three.js
library is justified.

2.1. 3D Web Publishing
     The first approaches of 3D content on the web combined user interfaces such as OpenGL, Direct 3D
or Java 3D with ISO VRML and X3D standards [8]. A common requirement was the partial or exclusive
use of add-ons beyond the software and the browser. Until 2011, the lack of standardization and the
diverging implementations prevented the consideration of 3D content as an internet media. The advent
of WebGL standard introduced an intrinsic and cross-platform technical visualization environment and
pushed the development of supportive libraries, open-source frameworks and commercial software.
Synergetic approaches for precise 3D representations of the field employ low-level programming
libraries like Three.js [9], Babylon.js [10] and Scene.js [11] with the higher-lever frameworks and
software Potree [12], 3DHOP [13], X3DOM [14], Sketchfab or alternatively Unity3D. Some of them
configure an adaptive user interface with predefined functions while other abstract WebGL concepts
to offer shading and rendering methods as well as animations, math routines, loaders and scene
components [15–17]. Each solution entails different code literacy skills, technological pipeline, data
size and formats but eventually all succeed in their applicability area. There exists a considerable
body on literature dedicated to Cultural Heritage 3D resources deploying either one exclusively
or a combination of these utilities [18–20]. 3DHOP and Potree are free and open-source software
packages for point cloud rendering and high-resolution 3D datasets respectively. Both have been
proven competent to challenging use cases such as 4D–3D heritage sites [21,22] or 3D archaeological
stratigraphy [23]. The progressive streaming of X3DOM has proven appropriate for case studies
where virtual large-scale archaeology [24], geospatial data [25] and scanned museum artifacts [26] are
presented in a basic viewer. A consolidated geometric documentation with textual descriptions linked
on spots is presented in a modular framework using JavaScript, HTML5 and WebGL. Rather than
deploying the X3DOM model directly, XML files describe the configuration, content and semantics
schema that was incorporated independently to a 3D viewer module. [27]. Sketchfab is a commercial
platform that hosts the 3D assets of more than 500 cultural institutions but its navigation, labeling and
scene editing services are determined by the membership plan users are purchasing [28]. The free
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                           4 of 26



option allows a partially adjustable interaction and a number of annotations on top of the 3D scene
but no further modifications can be made [29,30]. An unconventional way of online 3D publishing
is merging gaming technology with WebGL. The Unity3D commercial game engine is known for its
advanced interaction capabilities like ground detection and animation events and its robust API for
large and complex geometries. The created 3D scene is compiled to be compatible with WebGL leading
to big file size and memory footprint unlike native JavaScript solutions. Arc-Team has published
a virtual navigation application on a photorealistic 3D model of Punta Linke archaeological museum
using Unity 3D. The tour simulates how the 3D scene looks from eye-height, imitating the human-like
walking behavior while highlighted points of interest provide additional information [31].
     Among the aforementioned development platforms, research specific to a visualization schema
that unites the manifold of a geometric documentation dataset is scarcely considered. In general, they
adhere to the default set of capabilities of web-publishing solutions rather than customize their built-in
functionalities to their project’s requirements. This study seeks to correlate cultural resources with high
variability of data types, formats and levels of precision on the basis of interaction, geospatial display
and semantics. In the need of a flexible modular setup, both commercial software like Sketchfab,
and Potree that is an exclusively point-cloud renderer are excluded.

2.2. 3D Online Streaming
      The concluding selection of the core display system depends upon its ability to manage large
files and high-resolution 3D geometries. The large size complicates the web transmission phase
and the rendering process. While WebGL provides instant access to graphics processor resources,
the way data are transferred from a remote server to the local GPU is a purely programming
matter. Loading each 3D model in its entirety implies transferring a file of hundreds of megabytes.
This technique is ineffective, especially if the loading has to be completed in order to be able to visualize
it. The fact that it is deployed by Unity3D for web publishing degrades its performance and confines
its applicability. To address shortcomings and failures, robust 3D visualization systems utilize either
multi-layer or multi-resolution data encoding. Other support progressive data transfer or suggest
pre-processing compression techniques with good ratios [32]. Alliez and Desbrun introduced in 2001
a type of interactive encoding that enables progressive connectivity with the rendering system [33].
More recently, Gobbetti et al. proposed the parameterization of 3D models to an equivalent format that
mimics the multi-resolution logic [34] and Lavoué et al. achieved a satisfying compression ratio of
3D meshes in a relatively short time through the conjunction of iterative simplifications with P3DW
data encoding [35]. In 2015, Ponchio and Dellepiane developed a multi-resolution rendering paradigm
that combines the progressive streaming of view-dependent representations of the mesh with data
online compression/decompression [36]. This algorithm along with simplification, compression and
displaying utilities compose a C++ and JavaScript library, Nexus.js and is exploited by the 3DHOP
framework and Three.js library. The latter defines as well a Level of Detail (LOD) constructor that
switches rendering between less or more detailed versions of the mesh based on the distance from the
camera. Alternatively, the POP Buffer is a lightweight hybrid scheme that attains a fast-progressive
transmission and basic multi-layer features [37]. This single-rate approach is taken by X3DOM
framework that transfers directly to the GPU the stored quantized geometry but underperforms as
regards compression rates.
      Concerning the prerequisites of a fast start-up time and a reduced network load, the multiresolution
format seems to be the optimal solution for the analysis preservation of our high-resolution 3D models.
And yet, 3DHOP framework excels in both performance and range of applicability. In comparison with
X3DOM that also outstands in the field, 3DHOP has a flexible structure with simpler configuration
setup and as mentioned above, better rendering capabilities. As it is tailor-made to detailed Cultural
Heritage representations and supports modifications, it meets the standards of the proposed use cases.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                         5 of 26



3. Methodology
     A detailed overview of the methodology followed with the core underlying components of the
implementation is described in this section. After clarifying the problem formulation and the difficulties
to be resolved in the current work, insights into the technological means are provided, comprising the
multiresolution schema of Nexus.js library, the programming tools and the 3D visualization pipeline.
The case study is presented with emphasis to data acquisition and processing workflow and finally,
the architecture of the platform and its data structure are defined and analyzed.

3.1. Problem Definition
      The main problem in managing heterogeneous datasets of the Cultural Heritage lies in their size,
especially when remote access and use over the Internet is entailed. Loading time, lossless transmission,
network load and hardware limitations are consequent issues that dictate 3D visualization quality,
website’s overall performance and eventually, user’s engagement and retention. The amount of 3D and
2D data largely determines their transmission speed to the client browser. This overall time is bound
by the network bandwidth, namely, the maximum data rate which is specified by the Internet Service
Provider (ISP). Exceeding the bandwidth limit creates congestion points and bottlenecks on the data
transmission line. Congestion occurs once the router is running out of available buffer, an overflow
which is likely to happen when large amounts of contents are transferred online. Therefore, the huge
3D models size leads to increased latency, packets loss and poor performance and the site ceases to
be functional. In order to compensate for the transmission delay and network load, the total amount
of the 3D models is often reduced. Depending on the editing software, the compression method and
the development platform, the consequences may be loss of geo-referencing as most software impose
their own coordinate systems and quality degradation related to geometry and texture. The perceived
visual quality is inevitably equated with the visual fidelity of the original models. Its degradation does
not justify their high-cost and time-consuming generation processes and is not consistent with their
role as geospatial and geometrically accurate data. The end users take the visualized cultural assets
at face value as the rendered appearance is not appealing and doesn’t correspond to a detailed and
realistic representation. In addition, precise measurement tools cannot be implemented in the context
of scientific and professional use.
      At the same time, the platform’s development must conform to the practices and the thematic
design of an online 3D Cultural Heritage repository in order to fulfill its purposes. Besides the
aforementioned visualization efficiency, basic practices encompass interactivity, data interoperability
and information systems. Their objectives are user’s familiarization with the cultural resources via
easy-to-use interaction components and accessible archiving, multidisciplinary knowledge transfer
and obviously digital preservation of its prominent content. Common services comprise manipulation
of the 3D scene (move, rotate and zoom) using the trackball, highlighted and clickable points of interest
with aside relative information and textual labeling. The freely navigation is appropriate for artifacts,
small-scale assets and flat surfaces but rather inadequate for large-scale monuments and complex
geometries. Polymorphic and heterogeneous data are usually displayed on independent webpages
accordingly to their visualization format or the type of information they educe. In the case of image
and text incorporation to the 3D visualization page, they undertake a static role with a specific position
outside the border of the 3D viewer. Such platforms are insufficient to spatially relate 3D and 2D
information, failing to generate a two-way access and provide an exploratory examination of the data.
In terms of programming technique, user interaction requires the design of a coordinated events’
system to avoid glitches and delays in response. The hierarchical model of the interface and the WebGL
3D specifications restrict some content and structure adjustments. Exceeding the canvas element and
executing queries asynchronously, imitating multi-threading process without runtime errors would
attain high-performance and advanced interaction.
high-performance and advanced interaction.

3.2. Technical Pipeline

3.2.1. Multi-Resolution         Format
       Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                     6 of 26

      The multi-resolution approach ensures fast data transfer, rendering and loading, compensating
for size3.2.
          andTechnical   Pipeline Generally, multi-resolution schemes divide geometry into smaller parts, an
                 complexity.
effective   method
        3.2.1.          for slow network
                Multi-Resolution     Format connections as well. Different levels of detail correspond to each
geometric part. The transmission is made on demand and the resolution is view-dependent. Only
              The multi-resolution approach ensures fast data transfer, rendering and loading, compensating
the sections of the model that are absolutely necessary for the composition of each display are loaded
        for size and complexity. Generally, multi-resolution schemes divide geometry into smaller parts,
and delivered.
        an effective The   advantages
                        method    for slow of   this approach
                                             network    connections      well. Different in
                                                                     as summarized
                                                                   are                        fastofstart-up
                                                                                           levels                 time, minimized
                                                                                                      detail correspond      to
network     load  and    considerably      good    visual   quality.
        each geometric part. The transmission is made on demand and the resolution is view-dependent.readily
                                                                      A   low-resolution      version    of the    model    is
available
        Only some     milliseconds
                the sections   of the model     the are
                                         after that   start-up.   Thenecessary
                                                          absolutely     model isforgradually        refined
                                                                                       the composition           as new
                                                                                                            of each         parts are
                                                                                                                       display
progressively
        are loaded  loaded,     depending
                       and delivered.            on the distance
                                          The advantages                 from are
                                                             of this approach           viewpointinand
                                                                                  thesummarized                 the position
                                                                                                                          time, and
                                                                                                         fast start-up
        minimized     network    load  and  considerably   good  visual  quality.  A low-resolution
orientation of the camera. Our visualization system exploits the multi-resolution format as an         version   of the model
        is readily available some milliseconds after the start-up. The model is gradually refined as new parts are
intrinsic   component of the Nexus.js library, developed by Visual Computing Lab of CNR-ISTI. Its
        progressively loaded, depending on the distance from the viewpoint and the position and orientation
integrated distribution comprises simplification, compression and streaming utilities as well as an
        of the camera. Our visualization system exploits the multi-resolution format as an intrinsic component
interface
        of the   the converted
            forNexus.js              models. Itbystreams
                           library, developed                 directly for
                                                      Visual Computing     Labonline   visualization
                                                                                of CNR-ISTI.             very large
                                                                                                Its integrated           3D models,
                                                                                                                  distribution
point clouds
        comprises and    texture maps
                     simplification,         with per-vertex
                                       compression                attributes,
                                                       and streaming                typical
                                                                                  a well
                                                                       utilities as             interface for theof
                                                                                         as ancharacteristic           scanned and
                                                                                                                    converted
image-based
        models.photogrammetric
                   It streams directly for data.   Thevisualization
                                              online     data encoding       constitutes
                                                                      very large            a pre-processing
                                                                                   3D models,    point clouds and    phase   where a
                                                                                                                       texture
sequencemapsofwith    per-vertex attributes,
                  sub-sampled                  a typical
                                      partitions          characteristic
                                                     of the              of scanned
                                                              object, from            and image-based
                                                                                           to fine, is photogrammetric
                                                                                 coarse                    generated and their
        data.  The  data  encoding   constitutes   a pre-processing  phase   where  a sequence
corresponding representations of different resolutions are stored in the nxs structure.          of sub-sampled      partitions The
        of the object, from coarse to fine, is generated and their corresponding representations of different
multiresolution model can be either compressed, pruned or locally visualized (Figure 1).
        resolutions are stored in the nxs structure. The multiresolution model can be either compressed, pruned
Compression is slightly lossy with visible results in small 3D models but attains better performance
        or locally visualized (Figure 1). Compression is slightly lossy with visible results in small 3D models but
and less   server-side
        attains             memory and
                 better performance     consumption.        Pruning
                                             less server-side  memory     a sort of optimization
                                                                       isconsumption.                   as itofreduces
                                                                                         Pruning is a sort                 the size of
                                                                                                                 optimization
the files
        as itand    assists
              reduces          inofthe
                        the size          appearance
                                    the files and assists in      more detailed
                                                               a appearance
                                                           ofthe               of a moreversion
                                                                                          detailed of   the ofobject
                                                                                                     version             in in
                                                                                                                  the object  website
initialization.   The streaming
        website initialization.    The involves
                                        streaming loading,     decompressing
                                                     involves loading,               and sending
                                                                         decompressing    and sending      data
                                                                                                      thethe         structure to the
                                                                                                               datastructure
GPU. Theto the  GPU. TheisNexus.js
              Nexus.js       appended  is appended
                                            to 3DHOP’sto 3DHOP’s          and and
                                                                    codebase
                                                             codebase               provides
                                                                                provides       a loaderfor
                                                                                            a loader         Three.js library.
                                                                                                         for Three.js    library.




                    Figure 1. A 1.multi-resolution
                         Figure    A multi-resolution       in the graphical
                                                      modelin
                                                    model          graphicalinterface
                                                                              interface   of nxsview
                                                                                      of nxsview tool. tool.

        3.2.2. Front-End Development
             Front-end programming defines the content and the design of the elements’ user interacts
        with in any browser with network access. The developed visualization platform is intended for
        real-time information retrieval and interactive functionalities; thus, it is hosted by a dynamic website.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                       7 of 26



The front-end part is made up of the web markup HTML, CSS and principally of the programming
language JavaScript. The rest is built upon Apache web server, MongoDB database and the server-side
scripting language PHP. Its client-side part though outweighs the back-end. Specific JavaScript scripts
control the response of the server to user requests for continuous updating of the dynamic website
procedures. However, it cannot be predicted whether the result of running parallel processes will
be successful. Apart from the single threaded JavaScript, the large number of files being accessed
and processed and the sequential changes made to the DOM jeopardize its feasibility. In order to
eliminate the risk, JavaScript’s methods for synchronizing and overlapping dynamic operations are
examined, tested and applied. The event methods are essential for the responsiveness of the browser to
interactive tasks and the synchronization technique. An event is a user-generated action that triggers a
script to run and the encoded JavaScript responses that receive the action are called event handlers.
The assignment is made with reference to the desired DOM object, and then a function is assigned to
the corresponding event handler property. An open-source library that simplifies event handling and
abstracts JavaScript scripting into simple and intuitive syntax is jQuery. The optimized and compressed
format profits the delegation of browser events, the handling of the HTML page and the manipulation
of the DOM. It is principally used for cross-platform web applications and jointly with AJAX it corrects
the potential inconsistencies between browsers. The HTML <canvas> element defines the region of
the website where the 3D scene is rendered. It configures its position and dimensions in the HTML
website and exploits the scene-graph provided by the 3D rendering APIs like WebGL.

3.2.3. 3D Visualization Tools
     The visualization of the heterogeneous data is assigned to the 3DHOP framework and the Three.js
graphics library, hence to the graphics rendering processes of the WebGL API. Every single technology is
open-source with an active community of contributors, codebase transparency and scalable capabilities.
They are all implemented in client-side facilitating the access and interaction between the different
configuration levels. JavaScript bridges the gap between the underlying systems’ architecture and their
supporting API layers. Therefore, 3D viewers tailored to the high standards of 3D Cultural Heritage
archives can be created with the appropriate code adjustments and additions. 3DHOP framework,
developed by the Visual Computing Laboratory of ISTI – CNR is devoted to interactive presentations
of high-resolution 3D models and points clouds of the field [38]. Its 3D viewer is embeddable to any
website without the need for a dedicated server and interoperates efficiently with HTML elements
and real-time JavaScript updates. Its mathematical formulas and geometry routines are endorsed
by SpiderGL, an open-source JavaScript library [39]. Among the ready-to-use tools and mid-level
functionalities it offers, the following establish advanced interactivity and used in the 3D platform:

Highlighted and clickable geometry that serves as an annotation tool for points of interest
Extraction of the original coordinates of any selected point on the model’s surface
Euclidean distance measurement between two selected points
Cross-section toolset for real-time orthogonal sections through the 3D scene or specific models

      The developed platform is a high-level solution that leverages the capabilities of lower-level
utilities to achieve the desired degree of customization [40]. The interdependency is scalable according
to the level of programming and the expected usability. In particular, it adopts the Nexus’s streaming,
rendering and displaying functions that uphold the visualization schema of the 3D models. On
scene level, the proposed system partially interferes with the existing settings of 3DHOP and Three.js.
It retains the key components of the scene graph, such as the hierarchical structures and the geometry
definition and equally modifies some of the appearance properties. In regards to functionality, new
programming models of dynamic manipulation of the 3D scene are created based on the build-in features
and the native functions of 3DHOP. The degree of 3DHOP’s extension on the scope of interactivity is
enhanced by a sophisticated and user-friendly graphical environment. Finally, on integration level,
the current solution is independent of its structural components. The incorporation of a complete
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                        8 of 26


regards to functionality, new programming models of dynamic manipulation of the 3D scene are
created based on the build-in features and the native functions of 3DHOP. The degree of 3DHOP’s
extension    on the
Remote Sens. 2019,     scope of interactivity is enhanced by a sophisticated and user-friendly graphical
                   11, 2508                                                                          8 of 26
environment. Finally, on integration level, the current solution is independent of its structural
components. The incorporation of a complete dataset, the investigation of correlation strategies with
dataset, the investigation of correlation strategies with the 3D content and the final programming
the 3D content and the final programming orchestration are autonomous issues, being developed
orchestration are autonomous issues, being developed from scratch. As part of the integration, the
from scratch. As part of the integration, the Three.js library is imported for the generation of multiple
Three.js library is imported for the generation of multiple viewports on the same page. Besides the
viewports on the same page. Besides the creation of advanced computer graphics, it maintains a
creation of advanced computer graphics, it maintains a wide range of loaders for various types of
wide range of loaders for various types of 3D data, including a compatible solution for Nexus.js. The
3D data, including a compatible solution for Nexus.js. The supplementary viewers aim to enhance
supplementary viewers aim to enhance and clarify the main 3DHOP scene by replacing the ordinary
and clarify the main 3DHOP scene by replacing the ordinary collections of images with collections of
collections of images with collections of individual 3D models. In this way, 3D data of different scale,
individual 3D models. In this way, 3D data of different scale, resolution and level of detail are directly
resolution and level of detail are directly accessed. Figure 2 illustrates the various hierarchical levels
accessed. Figure 2 illustrates the various hierarchical levels of the platform’s components regarding
of the platform’s components regarding our interference to each codebase. The utilities close to the
our interference to each codebase. The utilities close to the bottom of the pyramid correspond to
bottom of the pyramid correspond to low and mid programming levels with zero or little
low and mid programming levels with zero or little modifications respectively. The 3D platform is
modifications respectively. The 3D platform is the synergistic result of its inferior layers and
the synergistic result of its inferior layers and comprises the visualization interface available to the
comprises the visualization interface available to the end users.
end users.




                        Figure 2.
                        Figure 2. Structural
                                  Structural schema
                                             schema of the visualization
                                                    of the visualization tools
                                                                         tools of
                                                                               of the
                                                                                  the application.
                                                                                      application.

3.3. System
3.3. System Architecture
            Architecture
       The client-server
       The                    computingmodel
             client-server computing          modelprovides
                                                       provides  thethetwo-way
                                                                          two-way  communication
                                                                                         communication    between
                                                                                                               betweenthe user     and
                                                                                                                             the user
the website.
and              In theIncurrent
       the website.                case the
                            the current    casewebthebrowser     undertakes
                                                       web browser                the rolethe
                                                                           undertakes                   of theThe
                                                                                                  roleclient.
                                                                                               of the                dataThe
                                                                                                                 client.      transfer
                                                                                                                                   data
between     the  server    and  the client   is assigned     to the  HyperText        Transfer     Protocol
transfer between the server and the client is assigned to the HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the          (HTTP),      the  basic
architectural
basic            structure
         architectural        of the Internet.
                         structure                HTTP messages
                                      of the Internet.      HTTP messages            of sequential
                                                                         are a set are                 requests and
                                                                                           a set of sequential            responses.
                                                                                                                     requests      and
The server The
responses.             to read
                usedserver       thetoHTTP
                              used      read the               the Apache
                                                     HTTPisprotocol
                                                protocol                  is theHTTP
                                                                                   Apache   server,
                                                                                                HTTPanserver,
                                                                                                          open-source        solution
                                                                                                                  an open-source
developed
solution       by the Apache
            developed     by theSoftware      Foundation
                                   Apache Software            (ASF). It is
                                                          Foundation       (ASF).    It is and
                                                                              installed           maintained
                                                                                            installed            on the local
                                                                                                        and maintained          ondisk
                                                                                                                                    the
and aims
local   disk to
             andserve
                   aimsusers’   requests
                                    users'and
                          to serve               promote
                                            requests     and the   hostedthe
                                                              promote        websites.
                                                                                hosted websites.        In thisthe
                                                                                            In this project,        local the
                                                                                                                 project,    server   is
                                                                                                                                  local
the  development       and   testing  environment.
server is the development and testing environment.
       The                 HTML,CSS,
             platform’s HTML,
       The platform’s                CSS,andandJavaScript
                                                   JavaScriptfiles,   the
                                                                 files,    3DHOP
                                                                         the  3DHOP    distribution,
                                                                                           distribution,      3D 3D
                                                                                                         thethe   models
                                                                                                                       models       the
                                                                                                                               andand
complementary
the   complementary   data data
                            are stored           Apache
                                         in the in
                                  are stored                htdocs htdocs
                                                     the Apache       folder. The
                                                                                folder.distribution
                                                                                            The distribution       of thelibrary
                                                                                                       of the Three.js        Three.jsis
stored    there  as  well  (Figure   3).  The   configured     local   network     ensures       the
library is stored there as well (Figure 3). The configured local network ensures the client/server   client/server     interference
to efficientlytosimulate
interference                  thesimulate
                    efficiently    website’sthe appearance      and performance
                                                    website’s appearance         and performance           beforefor
                                                                                            before it is ready      it ishosting
                                                                                                                           ready for on
a remoteon
hosting     web   server. The
               a remote     webIP   address
                                  server.   Theof IP   site is replaced
                                                  theaddress     of the siteby the   localhostby
                                                                                is replaced        address   for instant
                                                                                                     the localhost           accessfor
                                                                                                                        address       to
the  files on  the local  server.  On  the   Internet   level, communication          is  initiated  by
instant access to the files on the local server. On the Internet level, communication is initiated by thethe  browser     so   that the
server is ready
browser     so thattothe
                       respond.
                           server Initially,
                                   is readythe      browser loads
                                               to respond.            the web
                                                               Initially,         site’s graphical
                                                                            the browser                userweb
                                                                                               loads the      interface.    From the
                                                                                                                  site's graphical
moment      of loading   and   as long   as the  user  is active   and   interacts    with    its content,
user interface. From the moment of loading and as long as the user is active and interacts with its         the  client   constantly
sends requests
content,            to theconstantly
            the client      server. The   server
                                        sends       inspectstothethe
                                                 requests               server.and
                                                                    requests      Theresponds.       The returned
                                                                                          server inspects              information
                                                                                                                the requests       and
is stored byThe
responds.       thereturned
                     client. For  the proposed
                                information          system,bythe
                                                is stored        the  client. is
                                                                    website       loaded
                                                                                For   the proposed        standard
                                                                                             using thesystem,         client-server
                                                                                                                    the   website is
communication that was described above. Interaction functions are just simple requests to the server.
The browser analyzes and executes the scripts it receives in response to its intrinsic script’s mechanism.
Following the same logic, Nexus.js streams the multi-resolution models by sending their various
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                9 of 26


loaded using the standard client-server communication that was described above. Interaction
functions are just simple requests to the server. The browser analyzes and executes the scripts it
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                             9 of 26
receives in response to its intrinsic script’s mechanism. Following the same logic, Nexus.js streams
the multi-resolution models by sending their various representations with sequential requests to the
browser. Through
representations      withthesequential
                              HTTP protocol          algorithm
                                                the to
                                         requests                  gainsThrough
                                                        the browser.      random access     to binary
                                                                                     the HTTP   protocol       and
                                                                                                        filesthe    receives
                                                                                                                  algorithm
specific
gains     data partitions
       random                   from files
                 access to binary      eachand
                                             file;
                                                receives    transferring
                                                    thus, specific    data partitions  necessary
                                                                            only the from          datathus,
                                                                                             each file;           time. The
                                                                                                            at atransferring
browser    successively      loads  the 3D   data   by  accelerating    the  server’s  hardware
only the necessary data at a time. The browser successively loads the 3D data by accelerating      through      the  WebGL the
API.  When     the  Three.js   user  interface  is called,   the  scene  graph   is updated    without
server’s hardware through the WebGL API. When the Three.js user interface is called, the scene graph     the   requirement
to updated
is draw thewithout
                entire 3D thescene   on each to
                               requirement        drawThe
                                               frame.     the client
                                                               entiredoes    not need
                                                                       3D scene         to make
                                                                                   on each  frame.repeated
                                                                                                     The client requests   for
                                                                                                                    does not
visualization     but   just   one  is enough     to   respond     to  Three.js.  The   response
need to make repeated requests for visualization but just one is enough to respond to Three.js. Thetime     though    is   not
immediate.
response   time             is notNexus
                    equivalent
               Anthough                    loader
                                   immediate.     Ancan    compensate
                                                       equivalent    Nexus     this delay.
                                                                           forloader        In addition,
                                                                                      can compensate     forasynchronous
                                                                                                              this delay. In
server  calls  by   AJAX    in  conjunction   with   jQuery     and  the JSON    format   establish
addition, asynchronous server calls by AJAX in conjunction with jQuery and the JSON format establish the   connection     to a
MongoDB        database’s     collection.  This    part  of   the  client-server    system   is maintained
the connection to a MongoDB database’s collection. This part of the client-server system is maintained           for  a  new
developed
for           tool and istool
    a new developed          presented   in the Section
                                 and is presented     in the5. Section 5.




      Figure
      Figure 3.  System architecture
             3. System                 and functional
                                            functional relationships
                         architecture and              relationships that accomplish the
                                                                     that accomplish the server–client
                                                                                         server–client
      computing model.
      computing model.

     As shown in Figure 3, the platform’s homepage hosts two 3D model viewers, inherited by 3DHOP
     As shown in Figure 3, the platform's homepage hosts two 3D model viewers, inherited by
and Three.js library. In total it comprises three webpages and various image collections. Predefined
3DHOP and Three.js library. In total it comprises three webpages and various image collections.
points of the homepage’s 3D viewer are indicated as interlinks the user can follow to navigate the
Predefined points of the homepage’s 3D viewer are indicated as interlinks the user can follow to
subpages and digital image collections. The subpages are ancillary 3D repositories for the detailed 3D
navigate the subpages and digital image collections. The subpages are ancillary 3D repositories for
models and contain a 3DHOP viewer either with multimedia or a second Three.js viewer.
the detailed 3D models and contain a 3DHOP viewer either with multimedia or a second Three.js
viewer.
4. Case Study
      This
4. Case    section gives initially a brief description of the study area emphasizing on historical and
         Study
archaeological aspects. Then, the photogrammetric procedures of data acquisition and processing are
      This section gives initially a brief description of the study area emphasizing on historical and
analyzed and the outcomes of the 3D geometric documentation are presented. Among the integrated
archaeological aspects. Then, the photogrammetric procedures of data acquisition and processing
Cultural Heritage dataset three case studies are demonstrated and used as inputs on the 3D platform:
are analyzed and the outcomes of the 3D geometric documentation are presented. Among the
(a) The archaeological site of Meteora (b) The Pixari pillar with the hermitages of St. Gregory (c) The
integrated Cultural Heritage dataset three case studies are demonstrated and used as inputs on the
old catholikon of the monastery of St. Stephen. The second and third case studies have been digitized
3D platform: (a) The archaeological site of Meteora (b) The Pixari pillar with the hermitages of St.
both as part of the 3D model of the site and independently for high geometric and visual accuracy.
Gregory (c) The old catholikon of the monastery of St. Stephen. The second and third case studies
haveStudy
4.1.   beenArea
             digitized both as part of the 3D model of the site and independently for high geometric
and visual accuracy.
      Meteora is located near the town of Kalambaka, at the northwestern part of Thessaly, Greece.
It constitutes
4.1. Study Areaa special geological phenomenon and hosts one of the most prominent monastic complexes
of Orthodox religion in Greece. The giant rocks are molasses sediments that were formed at the
end ofMeteora   is located
        the Tertiary,      near the
                       23 million         of Kalambaka,
                                    townago
                                  years                  at the
                                             and are mainly      northwestern
                                                             composed         part of Thessaly,
                                                                         of sandstone           Greece. It
                                                                                       and conglomerate.
constitutes   a  special  geological  phenomenon     and  hosts   one of the  most  prominent   monastic
The original number of monasteries that were built in the 16th century at the top of some pillars    was
complexes    of Orthodox   religion in Greece. The giant rocks  are molasses sediments  that were
twenty-four but only six are preserved, restored and functioning at the moment. The archaeologicalformed
site of Meteora was included in the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1988. The proposal, evaluation
and selection were under the UNESCO cultural criteria (C 1–5) and the natural environment criterion
  Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                10 of 26


   at the end of the Tertiary, 23 million years ago and are mainly composed of sandstone and
   conglomerate. The original number of monasteries that were built in the 16th century at the top of
   some pillars was twenty-four but only six are preserved, restored and functioning at the moment.
 RemoteSens.
Remote         2019,11,
         Sens.2019,   11,2508
                          x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                  10of
                                                                                                                                of26
                                                                                                                                   26
   The archaeological         site of Meteora was included in the UNESCO World Heritage List in 1988.10The
   proposal, evaluation and selection were under the UNESCO cultural criteria (C 1–5) and the natural
 at the end of the Tertiary, 23 million years ago and are mainly composed of sandstone and
   environment criterion (N 7). It has been also proposed as a geological heritage monument because of
(N   7). It has been
 conglomerate.        Thealso   proposed
                             original         as a geological
                                         number                 heritage
                                                    of monasteries            were builtbecause
                                                                        thatmonument       in the 16th     unique at
                                                                                                   of itscentury     geomorphic
                                                                                                                         the top of
   its unique geomorphic and geological features. The Meteora rocks are considered part of the
and    geological      features.    The    Meteora    rocks   are considered      part  of the Antichasia
 some pillars was twenty-four but only six are preserved, restored and functioning at the moment.              mountain      range
   Antichasia mountain range and the whole region is designated as NATURA 2000 protected area.
and
 The the    whole region
       archaeological        siteisof
                                    designated
                                       Meteora was  as NATURA
                                                        included in 2000 theprotected
                                                                              UNESCOarea. World The  St. Stephen
                                                                                                  Heritage      List inmonastery
                                                                                                                         1988. The
   The St. Stephen monastery is connected to female monasticism and one of the first founded. Its old
is  connected
 proposal,         to femaleand
               evaluation         monasticism
                                     selection      and under
                                                         one ofthe
                                                  were            theUNESCO
                                                                        first founded.
                                                                                   cultural   old main
                                                                                          Itscriteria  (C  church
                                                                                                           1–5)  and (catholikon)
                                                                                                                       the  natural
   main church (catholikon) is a small, single-naved basilica with narthex with exceptional samples of
is  a small,
 environment   single-naved
                    criterion      basilica
                                 (N 7).        with
                                          It has4).
                                                 beennarthex
                                                        also    with
                                                              proposed exceptional
                                                                           as a Virgin
                                                                                 geological
                                                                                      samples    of post-Byzantine
                                                                                             heritage monument            frescoes
   post-Byzantine        frescoes    (Figure         The   frescoes   of the             Blachernitissa                   on theof
                                                                                                           (Platytera)because
(Figure
 its       4).
      unique   The    frescoes
                 geomorphic       of the
                                    and    Virgin  Blachernitissa
                                            geological    features.  (Platytera)
                                                                      The    Meteoraon the
   sanctuary of the church and the depictions of holy founders Anthony and Philotheus and   sanctuary
                                                                                         rocks  are      of the
                                                                                                      considered church
                                                                                                                      part and   the
                                                                                                                             ofthethe
depictions
 Antichasia     of  holy
                 mountain  founders
                                 range   Anthony
                                          and   the  and
                                                     whole Philotheus
                                                             region    is and   the Dormition
                                                                           designated    as      of
                                                                                            NATURA
   Dormition of the Virgin Mary are the most distinguished. The wall paintings and decorations were  the  Virgin
                                                                                                          2000     Mary
                                                                                                                 protected  are the
                                                                                                                               area.
most
 The    distinguished.
       St.
   performedStephen
                 in two       The wall
                        monastery
                           phases.          paintings
                                            connected
                                      Itiswas          and
                                               built around  decorations
                                                         to female           wereand
                                                               the 14monasticism
                                                                      th century    performed
                                                                                       and       in by
                                                                                            one of
                                                                                        renovated   two
                                                                                                    the thephases.
                                                                                                          first founded.
                                                                                                             monk             built
                                                                                                                      It wasIts
                                                                                                                     Philotheus  old
around     the  14  th century and renovated by the monk Philotheus in the mid-16th century.
 main    church     (catholikon)
   in the mid-16th century.           is  a small,  single-naved     basilica   with  narthex   with   exceptional     samples     of
 post-Byzantine frescoes (Figure 4). The frescoes of the Virgin Blachernitissa (Platytera) on the
 sanctuary of the church and the depictions of holy founders Anthony and Philotheus and the
 Dormition of the Virgin Mary are the most distinguished. The wall paintings and decorations were
 performed in two phases. It was built around the 14th century and renovated by the monk Philotheus
 in the mid-16th century.




                                (a)                                                              (b)
        Figure4.4.The
      Figure             oldcatholikon
                             catholikonof
                    Theold                   theMonastery
                                                 Monastery of
                                          ofthe                     Stephen: (a)
                                                                              (a)Exterior;
                                                             of St. Stephen:                (b)Part
                                                                                 Exterior;(b)   Partofofthe
                                                                                                         thenave
                                                                                                              navewhere
                                                                                                                   where
        thefull-length
             full-lengthfigures
      the                             Saintsand
                          figuresofofSaints   andJesus
                                                  Jesus are
                                                        are distinct.  In the
                                                            distinct. In  the back  the iconostasis
                                                                              back the   iconostasisthat
                                                                                                     thatseparates
                                                                                                            separatesthe
                                                                                                                      the
        nave   from  the sanctuary   is distinguished.
      nave from the sanctuary is distinguished.

     The cavernous asceticism
                           (a)     that began around the 11th century in Meteora      (b)is of particular religious
and cultural significance. The early ascetics established small prayer spaces within the natural cavities
      Figure 4. The old catholikon of the Monastery of St. Stephen: (a) Exterior; (b) Part of the nave where
of the rocks and gradually organized ascetics as symbiotic places of worship, such as the Dupianite
      the full-length figures of Saints and Jesus are distinct. In the back the iconostasis that separates the
skete in the 12th century. On the northeast side of Pixari rock, at a height of 40 m, the cave hermitage of
      nave from the sanctuary is distinguished.
St. Gregory lies, a cluster of three hermitages with characteristic wood-beamed balconies (Figure 5).




                          (a)                                                              (b)
        Figure 5. (a) View of the rock of Pixari (b) The skete of Pixari with the three hermitages of St. Gregory
        and the characteristic wooden balconies and ladders.

       The cavernous asceticism that began around the 11th century in Meteora is of particular
  religious and cultural significance. The early ascetics established small prayer spaces within the
                      (a) rocks and gradually organized ascetics as symbiotic
  natural cavities of the                                                (b) places of worship, such as
      Figure5.
      Figure    (a) View
                    View of
             5. (a)          the rock
                                 rock of
                         of the          Pixari (b)
                                                 (b) The
                                      of Pixari          skete of
                                                               of Pixari
                                                     The skete           withthe
                                                                              the three
                                                                  Pixari with           hermitagesof
                                                                                   threehermitages ofSt.
                                                                                                     St. Gregory
                                                                                                         Gregory
      andthe
      and     characteristicwooden
          thecharacteristic   woodenbalconies
                                       balconiesandandladders.
                                                        ladders.

     The first
     The       one is atasceticism
                         a height ofthat
           cavernous                  25 m, the second
                                         began   aroundone
                                                         theat11th    and thein
                                                                35 mcentury   third at 40 m
                                                                                Meteora    is from the foot
                                                                                               of particular
of the pillar.
religious  andThe  wooden
                cultural      balcony isThe
                          significance.            asceticsasestablished
                                               preserved
                                         wellearly                       smallthat
                                                              the acute angle       Pixari
                                                                                prayer             with the
                                                                                           formswithin
                                                                                        spaces           the
natural cavities of the rocks and gradually organized ascetics as symbiotic places of worship, such as
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                   11 of 26



ground protects it from rain water and prevents corrosion. In 1972, when monks of the Great Meteoron
monastery climbed into these caves they discovered a chapel decorated with relatively well-preserved
14th-century frescoes. The three sides of this small church are built of stone and the fourth one is
carved in the rock.

4.2. Data Acquisition-Processing
      The geometric documentation of Cultural Heritage sites of great extent and morphological
peculiarities requires special planning for 3D representations of high fidelity and resolution. Besides
visual quality, a geometrically accurate topology is vital for the acquisition of precise metric information.
A second priority is the deployment of low-cost, fast and automated techniques for data acquisition
and processing. For mapping and 3D modeling large and inaccessible areas with the aforementioned
requirements and specifications the method of Aerial Photogrammetric Survey was exploited. The area
to be surveyed comprised 10 km2 of significant variations in altitude, dense vegetation and a 6 km2
archaeological site with a big number of landmarks. Therefore, it was captured by manned aircraft
system and a definitive number of ground control points (GCPs) was used to ensure accuracy in spite
of the topological variations. Almost 2500 both vertical and oblique images were acquired over the
site. The Structure from Motion (SfM) and MultiView Stereo (MVS) techniques were used for images
alignment and formation of the sparse point cloud and dense point cloud in the Agisoft Metashape
software. The editing, optimization and refinement of the dense point cloud and the generation of the
high-resolution 3D mesh were undertaken by the Geomagic Wrap 3D scanning software. The surface
color information was applied by the initial images. Considering the need of 3D models of different
level of detail and scales but equally, high accuracy and photo realism, the Pixari rock and the old
catholicon of the Monastery of St. Stephen were also documented. Two more methods were integrated
at the data acquisition phase; close-range and unmanned aerial photogrammetry. The data processing
until the generation of the photo-textured 3D models employed the same pipeline. In addition to the
3D products, site plans, ortho-photos and ortho-photo maps were generated.

4.3. Input Data and Basic Configuration
     Based on the scale and level of detail, the 3D model “Meteora” constitutes the core of the visualization
and the development of new tools and functionalities. The integration of the rest documentation outputs
forms a coherent Cultural Heritage archive on the basis of the spatial interconnections that derive from it.
In addition to “Meteora”, the platform is enriched with the following assets:
      3D models: Part of Pixari rock and separately the interior and exterior of the old catholicon of
St. Stephen’s Monastery
      Images: Ortho-photos, engravings and historical photographic evidence and photographic
documentation of monuments’ exterior and interior
      Text: Information, explanations and brief descriptions
      The 3D models’ properties and characteristics can be observed in Table 1.

                 Table 1. Characteristics of the 3D models that are integrated in the web platform.

                              Meteora         Pixari         Interior of St. Stephen   Exterior of St. Stephen
                          75M faces          17M faces             32M faces                  46M faces
     Geometry
                        40M vertices        7M vertices          17M vertices               23M vertices
     RGB data          Color per vertex   Texture mapping       Color per vertex           Color per vertex
      Format                 ply                 obj                  ply                        ply
    Original size          2.37 GB            354 MB                650 MB                     914 MB


     The 3D data are subject to a pre-processing phase in order to be initiated into the visualization
pipeline. They are converted to the Nexus multiresolution format prior to their progressive streaming
       Geometry
                         40M vertices            7M vertices                17M vertices                   23M vertices
      RGB data          Color per vertex       Texture mapping             Color per vertex               Color per vertex
       Format                 ply                     obj                        ply                            ply
     Original size          2.37 GB                354 MB                      650 MB                         914 MB
        The 3D data are subject to a pre-processing phase in order to be initiated into the visualization
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                                   12 of 26
 pipeline. They are converted to the Nexus multiresolution format prior to their progressive
 streaming and adaptive rendering to the 3D platform. The Nexus library supports both ply and obj
 file adaptive
and    formats rendering
                    with per-vertex
                                  to the 3D color    and texture
                                               platform.   The Nexusmapping         supports bothInply
                                                                          libraryrespectively.           theand             formatsa
                                                                                                                      file Pixari,
                                                                                                                 obj of
                                                                                                               case
 preparation
with   per-vertex is needed
                       color and                 be compatible
                                     order tomapping
                                 in texture               respectively.    In the case ofprerequisites.
                                                                   with conversion’s                          The accompanied
                                                                                              Pixari, a preparation      is needed
 texture
in  order toimage      should bewith
                be compatible          per-wedge      sinceprerequisites.
                                           conversion’s      the algorithm    The re-calculates
                                                                                    accompanied    thetexture     normal
                                                                                                        verteximage           during
                                                                                                                         should    be
 processing.since
per-wedge         Afterthe conversion,
                             algorithmthe       3D modelsthe
                                            re-calculates     arevertex
                                                                  pruned  normal       than be
                                                                              ratherduring        compressed
                                                                                               processing.            lossless size
                                                                                                                 for conversion,
                                                                                                              After
 reduction
the   3D models andareeventually,      attainthan
                           pruned rather       the beeligible encoding
                                                        compressed    for for   online
                                                                            lossless   size  reduction andThe
                                                                                          visualization.           3D models
                                                                                                              eventually,      attainof
 Meteora,
the   eligiblePixari    and the
                 encoding     forexterior    of St. Stephen’sThe
                                   online visualization.         catholikon
                                                                    3D models   are of  Meteora,inPixari
                                                                                     presented       the 3DHOP
                                                                                                             and theframework’s
                                                                                                                        exterior of
 environment
St.                 in the main
     Stephen’s catholikon         arepage   and theinsubpages
                                       presented        the 3DHOP of the   3D platform
                                                                      framework’s            accordingly.
                                                                                         environment         Themain
                                                                                                         in the           entryand
                                                                                                                  data page       and
 scene   declaration       happen     in three   independent     HTML       files  using   the  basic
the subpages of the 3D platform accordingly. The data entry and scene declaration happen in three      3DHOP’s     interface.     The
 default graphical
independent        HTML    user interface
                             files  using theof the
                                                 basicvisualization,   including
                                                         3DHOP’s interface.        The              and the 3D
                                                                                           toolbargraphical
                                                                                      thedefault                   canvas
                                                                                                                user          can of
                                                                                                                      interface     be
 observed
the            in Figure
      visualization,         6 (a, b the
                          including           c). Theand
                                        andtoolbar      basic
                                                           the3D3Dviewer
                                                                    canvasiscan  formatted
                                                                                    be observed frominaFigure
                                                                                                         CSS file   based
                                                                                                                 6a–c.   Theon     the
                                                                                                                                basic
3D   viewer isdesign.
 responsive        formatted     from other,
                             Among                it determines
                                         a CSS file   based on the      position and
                                                                   theresponsive       design.   Among style
                                                                                            appearance     other,ofit its  elements
                                                                                                                      determines
 including
the   positionthe and toolbar     with its
                         appearance           individual
                                          style             fields. including
                                                  of its elements    The 3D model                    interior
                                                                                             of thewith
                                                                                    the toolbar                 of St. Stephen’s
                                                                                                          its individual      fields.
 catholikon
The   3D model       added
                 is of        and loaded
                        the interior                         Nexus geometry
                                               as customcatholikon
                                       of St. Stephen’s                 is added and to the   Three.js
                                                                                          loaded   as custom    Nexusin
                                                                                                        framework            another
                                                                                                                          geometry
 HTML
to         file (Figure
    the Three.js            6).
                     framework       in another HTML file (Figure 6).




                                (a)                                                                 (b)




                                (c)                                                                 (d)

Figure  6. The
    Figure      Theinputs
             6. 3D         of the
                      3D inputs ofdeveloped   platform
                                   the developed   platform   in 3DHOP’s
                                                         in the  the 3DHOP’sbasic useruser
                                                                               basic   interface (a) 3D
                                                                                           interface     model
                                                                                                     (a) 3D    of the
                                                                                                            model  of
archaeological   site of Meteora  (b) 3D  model   of the exterior  of St. Stephen’s old  catholikon  (c) 3D
    the archaeological site of Meteora (b) 3D model of the exterior of St. Stephen’s old catholikon (c) 3D  model   of
Pixari rock (d)  3D  model  of the interior of St. Stephen’s   old catholikon.
    model of Pixari rock (d) 3D model of the interior of St. Stephen’s old catholikon.

5. Web Platform

5.1. Data Structure and Graphics User Interface
     Prior to the 3D platform’s design, it is necessary to gather and organize its content logically.
The old catholikon of the Monastery of St. Stephen and the Pixari rock with the skete of Osios Gregorios
are located in the 3D model of the archaeological site of Meteora. The opportunity to represent this
spatial relationship in a practical context is offered by coinciding a cartographic and knowledge base in
5.1. Data Structure and Graphics User Interface
      Prior to the 3D platform’s design, it is necessary to gather and organize its content logically. The
old catholikon of the Monastery of St. Stephen and the Pixari rock with the skete of Osios Gregorios
areRemote
    locatedSens.in2019,
                    the11,3D2508model of the archaeological site of Meteora. The opportunity to represent this                                  13 of 26
spatial relationship in a practical context is offered by coinciding a cartographic and knowledge base
in the 3D environment of the platform. The 3D model of Meteora serves the function of being the
   theof3D
core      theenvironment
                 visualization    of the
                                     schemaplatform.
                                                  from Thewhich        model
                                                                  3D the            Meteora
                                                                            restofdata      derive  serves   the function
                                                                                                       as logical               of being
                                                                                                                       and spatial           the core
                                                                                                                                          entities.
   of the   visualization        schema      from    which     the   rest data    derive     as
Therefore, the model of Meteora is integrated to the homepage, Pixari in the first subpage and thelogical   and    spatial    entities.    Therefore,
   the model
interior  with the of Meteora
                        exterior is                       the homepage,
                                        St. Stephentocatholikon
                                    ofintegrated                          is thePixari
                                                                                  other in       the first subpage and the interior with
                                                                                            subpage.
   the  exterior     of  St.  Stephen     catholikon      is  the   other   subpage.
      The user is redirected to the supplementary repositories through links on the 3D scene of the
homepage.The These
                 user isinternal
                            redirected linksto the    assigned on therepositories
                                                 are supplementary               position ofthrough  the relative       on the
                                                                                                               links case        3D scene
                                                                                                                               studies          of the
                                                                                                                                           on the
generic   model These
   homepage.                  internal
                     of Meteora       and links
                                              areare  assigned
                                                   available          on specific
                                                                  after  the position            the relativeTextual
                                                                                     tools’ofactivation.          case studies       on the generic
                                                                                                                             information       and
   model     of   Meteora       and  are    available     after    specific    tools’  activation.
image collections are available to every page through navigation bars, menus, buttons and semantic        Textual     information        and image
   collections
links.  Design’sareaim    available    to every pageand
                               is a user-friendly            through      navigation
                                                                   sophisticated            bars, menus,
                                                                                        graphical               buttons
                                                                                                         interface      with anda semantic
                                                                                                                                    simple and   links.
   Design’s    aim     is a  user-friendly      and   sophisticated        graphical      interface
consistent data structure. A sense of predictability is intended so as the user can estimate the        with    a simple     and   consistent     data
   structure.     A  sense    of  predictability     is intended       so  as  the user     can   estimate
position of every element of the website and its functionality. This objective is met when the layout is       the  position     of  every   element
   of the website
operational.      It is and   its functionality.
                         of common                   This and
                                           perspective       objective    is met
                                                                    styling    for when
                                                                                    the whole the layout    is operational.
                                                                                                      repository.     Every page         of common
                                                                                                                                   It is contains
the title and a top margin, the side panel, a bottom margin and a main 3D scene. Image and 3Dthe
   perspective       and    styling   for   the  whole     repository.      Every     page     contains     the   title   and  a  top   margin,
   side panel,
models              a bottom
          collections,            margin
                            buttons,          and atext
                                         menus,       main and      scene. are
                                                               3Dfigures      Image     and out
                                                                                   placed       3D models        collections,
                                                                                                      of the canvas,       which buttons,
                                                                                                                                     definesmenus,
                                                                                                                                                the
   text  and   figures      are  placed     out   of the  canvas,      which     defines      the
3D space. The only exception is the toolbar’s position within the canvas for direct correlation and  3D  space.    The     only  exception       is the
ease of use. A elements’ hierarchy is maintained and priority is given to the 3D visualization. Such a is
   toolbar’s     position      within    the   canvas    for    direct  correlation        and     ease  of  use.   A    elements’      hierarchy
3Dmaintained
    repository designand priority      is given
                               facilitates             the 3Dusers
                                              bothtonovice         visualization.
                                                                        and domain     Such      a 3D repository
                                                                                             experts     with its simple design datafacilitates
                                                                                                                                       inquiring  both
   novice    users
through 3D models.    and    domain      experts     with   its  simple    data   inquiring        through      3D  models.
      TheThe    homepage
            homepage          ofofthe
                                    the3D3Dplatform
                                               platform is  is shown
                                                                shown in       Figure7.7.Its
                                                                          in Figure            Itssidebar
                                                                                                    sidebar consists
                                                                                                                consists     a drop-down
                                                                                                                          of of  a drop-down     menu
   withwith
          general
menu           generalinformation,
                            information, a collection     of orthophoto
                                               a collection       of orthophoto mapsmaps that cover       the entire
                                                                                                 that cover      the entire     areathree
                                                                                                                         area and             buttons
                                                                                                                                       and three
buttons with different interactive roles. The first provides access to supplementary galleriesimages
   with   different     interactive     roles.   The   first  provides      access    to  supplementary           galleries    of  historic       of
   and vintage
historic   imagesillustrations,
                        and vintagethe         second activates
                                            illustrations,              a new tool;
                                                                 the second       activatesthe interactive
                                                                                                   a new tool;    data theretrieval    fromdata
                                                                                                                             interactive       the 3D
   scene and
retrieval   fromthe  thethird
                           3D ascene
                                  guided        the thirdtour.
                                         andwebpage                 The toolbar
                                                              a guided       webpage        tour. Thebytoolbar
                                                                                     is composed              the interaction
                                                                                                                        is composed  functionalities
                                                                                                                                            by the
   of the   3D   space     and   each   icon’s    styling    corresponds        to the   role    it  performs.
interaction functionalities of the 3D space and each icon’s styling corresponds to the role it performs.




                                                                  Figure
                                                               Figure    7. Cont.
                                                                      7. Cont.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                                    14 of 26
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                       14 of 26
   Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                 14 of 26




                                         (a)
                                          (a)                                           (b)
                                                                                       (b)
      Figure
        Figure  Homepage
                   Homepageofofthe
             7. 7.                     3Dplatform
                                   the3D  platform with
                                                   with details fromthe
                                                        details from       sidecolumn:
                                                                       theside  column:(a)(a)tabs
                                                                                               tabs with
                                                                                                  with   map
                                                                                                       map    location
                                                                                                           location
        and
      and   brief
          brief    descriptionofofthe
                description                     and
                                        purposeand
                                    thepurpose  and methodology
                                                    methodology
                                                    methodology (b)(b)various
                                                                   (b)  various  imagegalleries.
                                                                        variousimage   galleries.
                                                                                image  galleries.

      OnOn   thehomepage
           the     homepageall   allthe
                                      thetools
                                          tools are
                                                 are pre-built
                                                      pre-built and       ready-to-useby
                                                                   and ready-to-use              3DHOPexcept
                                                                                            by3DHOP          except forfortwotwonewnew
   added
added       utilities:the
         utilities:     theautomatic
                      the   automatic     navigation and
                             automatic navigation
                                          navigation           the   activationofoftext
                                                               the activation
                                                          and the    activation                labels.The
                                                                                        textlabels.      Thewebpage
                                                                                                               webpage    with
                                                                                                                             withthethe
   documentationofofthe
documentation              thePixari
                                Pixarirock    and its
                                        rock and    its hermitages
                                                        hermitages is       structuredasasshown
                                                                        is structured           shownininFigure
                                                                                                             Figure 8. 8.
                                                                                                                        AnAn  image
                                                                                                                                image
   field
field    and
       and  anan   intrusivemenu
                intrusive      menuwith             categories comprise
                                              four categories
                                        withfour                  comprisethe   thesidebar.
                                                                                     sidebar.InInparticular,
                                                                                                      particular, the
                                                                                                                    thedropdown
                                                                                                                          dropdown
   navigationbar
navigation       barprovides
                       providesaccess
                                   accessto totextual
                                               textual information
                                                         information on        historic,religious
                                                                           on historic,    religiousand  andcultural
                                                                                                               cultural aspects
                                                                                                                           aspectsof of
   the  hermitages     and   collections   of the
the hermitages and collections of the photographic photographic      documentation         of the   landmark.
                                                   photographic documentation of the landmark. The last assets    The   last  assets
areare  displayedininthe
     displayed           theimage
                              imagefield
                                      fieldwhich
                                             which dynamically
                                                     dynamically changes
                                                                      changesits       contentaccording
                                                                                  itscontent       according  totouser’s
                                                                                                                    user’s
                                                                                                                    user’s choices.
                                                                                                                               choices.
                                                                                                                               choices.
   The  complete
The complete
      complete archiving
                    archiving
                   archivingof   of  the
                                     theold
                                 ofthe   old  catholikon
                                                catholikon
                                          oldcatholikon     of the  monastery      of St. Stephen     is presented    in  the  thirdthe
                                                               of the  monastery         of St.   Stephen     is presented
                                                            of the monastery of St. Stephen is presented in theinthird
   webpage of the platform (Figure 9). The exterior model of the old catholikon is displayed on a
third
webpagewebpage
             of theofplatform
                        the platform     (Figure
                                    (Figure         9). The
                                               9). The       exterior
                                                          exterior   modelmodel                                     displayed on
                                                                                                  catholikonisisdisplayed
                                                                                            oldcatholikon
                                                                                    thetheold
                                                                                of of                                              on a
   3DHOP’s viewer while its interior is visualized by Three.js. The pattern that defines the page’s data
3DHOP’s viewer while its interior is visualized by Three.js. The pattern that defines the page’s data
   structure is slightly different. With the incorporation of the second viewer, dual importance is
structure isisslightly
structure        slightly different.  With
                             different.      the incorporation
                                          With    the incorporation of the ofsecond
                                                                                the second        dual importance
                                                                                       viewer, viewer,                   is conveyed
                                                                                                             dual importance          is
   conveyed to 3D space and the 3D models have a stronger visual force. The rest of the content is
to 3D spacetoand
conveyed          3D  the  3D and
                                models
                       space          the have
                                           3D    a stronger
                                                models     havevisual
                                                                  a      force. The
                                                                     stronger     visual      of theThe
                                                                                        restforce.     content
                                                                                                           rest  is
                                                                                                                 of organized
                                                                                                                     the   content into
                                                                                                                                      is
   organized into two semantic elements: a top navigation bar and a horizontal image slider at the
two   semantic
organized         elements:     a top   navigation    bar  and   a  horizontal     image     slider
   bottom. into two semantic elements: a top navigation bar and a horizontal image slider at the      at the bottom.
bottom.




            Figure
          Figure       Thesecond
                           secondpage
                 8. 8.The              ofthe
                                          the 3D
                                  pageof         platform that
                                                          that hosts
                                              3D platform            thedocumentation
                                                                         documentationdata
                                                               hoststhe                data   Pixari
                                                                                           ofof      rock.
                                                                                                Pixari rock.

          Figure 8. The second page of the 3D platform that hosts the documentation data of Pixari rock.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                    15 of 26
   Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                 15 of 26




         Figure
      Figure   9. 9.
                  TheThe third
                       third page ofof
                               page    the3D
                                     the      platformthat
                                           3Dplatform       hoststhe
                                                                  thedocumentation
                                                       thathosts                            the old
                                                                                        of the
                                                                                   data of
                                                                      documentationdata             catholikon of
                                                                                                old catholikon
         of St. Stephen  monastery.
      St. Stephen monastery.

5.2.5.2. Dynamic
      Dynamic    MultimediaIncorporation
               Multimedia   Incorporation

      AA 3D3D   repositoryofofthe
             repository         thecultural
                                     culturalheritage
                                              heritage field cannot
                                                             cannot beberegarded
                                                                         regardedasasaaqualified
                                                                                          qualifiedand
                                                                                                     andconstructive
                                                                                                          constructive
   solution  unless  it  integrates   multimedia.   Image   and  text clarify, enhance   and enrich
solution unless it integrates multimedia. Image and text clarify, enhance and enrich the visualized 3Dthe visualized
   3D content.
content.           Especially
           Especially              if a comprehensive
                        if a comprehensive      presentation presentation    of the
                                                               of the products                         a geometric is
                                                                                        geometricofdocumentation
                                                                                   of aproducts
intended, the heterogeneous dataset should be exposed in its entirety. The platform incorporates The
   documentation      is  intended,    the  heterogeneous     dataset  should   be   exposed   in its  entirety. image
   platform   incorporates     image   collections  and  textual  information    the  user has  direct
collections and textual information the user has direct access while browsing it. Many of the current   access while
   browsing it. Many of the current digital archives of the field share this practice. This multimedia
digital  archives of the field share this practice. This multimedia display is esthetically pleasing and
   display is esthetically pleasing and useful but does not correspond to the spatial dimension of the
useful but does not correspond to the spatial dimension of the visualized data. The approach applied
   visualized data. The approach applied to Pixari’s 3D model in the platform’s subpage attempts to
to Pixari’s 3D model in the platform’s subpage attempts to tackle this deficiency. It is proposed that the
   tackle this deficiency. It is proposed that the aggregate data’s presentation is on the basis of their
aggregate data’s presentation is on the basis of their relative topology and emerge from a dynamic
   relative topology and emerge from a dynamic scheme. The functionality aims to showcase the
scheme. The functionality aims to showcase the hermitage of Saint Gregory and the inner chapel
   hermitage of Saint Gregory and the inner chapel located in one of the caves.
located in one of the caves.
      At first, a multi-level menu with slider effects is created in the side panel of the subpage. Creating
such a navigation bar by declaring each category and subcategory via the table element of HTML
and using the scroll and click effects with either CSS or jQuery is relatively simple. A more pertinent
strategy is the association of the information provided by the menu sections to the relevant 3D spot
of the scene. The plan leverages a native functionality from the 3DHOP’s scene setup; the hotspot.
Small spherical geometries are placed on the natural cavities of the hermitage and declared as spots in
the field of scene objects. When the hotspot tool is enabled, the spheres are highlighted and inherit the
clickable attribute. Their selection invokes a set of dynamic events: smooth animation that brings the
view to the hotspot and toggling of the side menu’s sections (Figure 10).
      The menu’s content, which provided general facts prior to the tool’s activation, is adapted to the
corresponding information for the featured landmark. Historical and cultural information, ortho-photos
and other photographic evidence configure and enrich each one of its customized versions. The text is
displayed in dialog popup windows while images either in a slider on the side panel of the webpage
or in their full size though redirection to the digital image galleries of the platform. The dynamically
modification of the navigation bar by assigning specific content to each hotspot is based on JavaScript
conditions and jQuery events. Each hotspot is declared as a case of the switch statement and each case
encloses the code with the actions enabled if this hotspot is clicked. The menu index is updated via
jQuery selectors and the click, toggle and toggleClass events. As more and more click event handlers
        Figure 10. Real-time adjustment of menu contents and its corresponding information for the selected
are added, it is necessary to unregister previous handlers by the .off(click) statement.
         hotspot.
browsing it. Many of the current digital archives of the field share this practice. This multimedia
display is esthetically pleasing and useful but does not correspond to the spatial dimension of the
visualized data. The approach applied to Pixari’s 3D model in the platform’s subpage attempts to
tackle this deficiency. It is proposed that the aggregate data’s presentation is on the basis of their
relative  topology
 Remote Sens.           and emerge from a dynamic scheme. The functionality aims to showcase the
              2019, 11, 2508                                                                       16 of 26
hermitage of Saint Gregory and the inner chapel located in one of the caves.




     Figure10.
    Figure   10.Real-time adjustment
                   Real-time         of menu
                              adjustment     contents
                                          of menu     and its corresponding
                                                    contents                information
                                                               and its corresponding    for the selected
                                                                                      information    for the
    hotspot.
     selected hotspot.

5.3. Development of New Tools
     The fact that in the archaeological site of Meteora the unique natural landscape is intertwined
with one of the most important Orthodox religious monuments accounts for its choice as a case study
for the 3D platform. The developed tools correspond to an insightful interpretation of the historical,
physical and cultural aspects of the site. The spatial distribution of historical and archaeological sights
within its borders requires specific mechanisms in order to be perceived and valued. The aim of both
academic and public engagement predisposes to increased difficulty regarding the diffusion of the
diversified information. Two new types of 3D scene navigation and annotation utilities are developed
for exploratory investigation of the archaeological site and parse of the documentation data: the first
involves a narrative tour through a predefined route and the second an interactive data retrieval directly
from the 3D scene. The textual and graphic label assignment enhances the cartographic interpretation
and serves the function of embellishing. The additions and extensions made are applicable to any
specific-domain heterogeneous dataset with a spatial reference.

5.3.1. Automatic Navigation
     A completely free navigation to the 3D space with the trackball is likely to disorient or confuse the
user but it definitely does not convey any kind of information. An opportunity to explore all the points
of interest of a Cultural Heritage site in short time with descriptive captions is presented by the tool
of automatic navigation. The mechanism that simulates immersive virtual tours is applied to the 3D
models of Meteora and Pixari of the homepage and subpage respectively. Every tour is assembled
by sequential seamless animations of the scene that either magnify a certain focus point or provide
a wider view. The camera frames the areas of interest above eye-level and from high angle conveying
an omniscient perspective and surmounting the problem of non-visible. Close-ups and tilted camera
angles help maneuver through the very rugged nature and change dynamically the center of attention.
At the same time, brief information is automatically generated and synchronized with the relevant
frame (Figure 11). Therefore, the tool offers a narrative navigation, highlighting the name and historical
aspects of the landmark or toponym displayed each time. The tour through the 3D model of Meteora
invokes a transition from the town of Kalampaka and the six functioning monasteries to the sketes and
the remains of old churches and chapels.
      Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                                         17 of 26
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                                        17 of 26



             Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                               17 of 26




       Figure
           Figure  Figure
                 11.  Snapshot
                     11.    11. Snapshot
                          Snapshot   during
                                      duringduring
                                               the  the  automatic
                                                     automatic
                                               the automatic           navigation
                                                                      navigation
                                                                   navigation       while
                                                                                 whilewhile camera
                                                                                        camera camera frames
                                                                                                  frames      pillars
                                                                                                           frames
                                                                                                           pillars    with
                                                                                                                     pillars
                                                                                                                   with     remains
                                                                                                                               with
                                                                                                                         remains    of of
                                                                                                                                       sketes. of
                                                                                                                                       remains
                   sketes.
       sketes.
           The tour on Pixari initiates from ground level at eye’s sight and is gradually elevated with smooth
      rotations The      tour   on Pixariofinitiates
                                              the 3Dfrom         ground      level at eye’sissight     and is gradually      elevated     with
             tourand
       The smooth    on   movements
                           Pixariand
                       rotations      initiates
                                          movements from  scene.
                                                          of ground
                                                                    This mechanism
                                                               the 3D scene. level   at mechanism
                                                                                  This   eye’sperformed
                                                                                                   sight    andeither
                                                                                                                   is gradually
                                                                                                        is performed
                                                                                                                         within    the container
                                                                                                                         either within  elevated
                                                                                                                                            the       with
      of the scene in normal display or in full screen. The user has the potential to pause or stop it at any
smooth rotations
            container ofand       movements
                             the scene    in normalof      the 3D
                                                       display     or inscene.     ThisThe
                                                                          full screen.    mechanism
                                                                                              user has theis     performed
                                                                                                               potential  to pause either
                                                                                                                                      or stop within the
      time. The movement of the camera to the predefined positions subsequently is triggered by setTimeout,
container   it at  any  time.
              of the time       The  movement
                                  in normal vector
                        scenefunction.             of  the
                                                  display    camera    to
                                                                or in full the  predefined    positions
                                                                                screen. The user           subsequently
                                                                                                          has the potential is triggered     by
                                                                                                                                    to pausethe   or stop
      a JavaScript
            setTimeout,       a JavaScript A  time function. withAthe   vector    with the six of
                                                                            six parameters             the trackball
                                                                                                    parameters     of thestate   represents
                                                                                                                            trackball     state
      any time.
it at current        The
                 positionthemovement
                              and             of
                                    is declared   the   camera        to  the   predefined        positions      subsequently         animations. by
                                                                                                                                       is  triggered
            represents          current    positionasanda function
                                                            is declared  variable    of a native
                                                                             as a function   variable method           method for
                                                                                                                 of 3DHOP
                                                                                                         of a native             of 3DHOP
setTimeout,
      Thus,for     a JavaScript
                  array   with all
             an animations.        Thus, time
                                      desired    function.
                                                 frames
                                            an array        is created
                                                         with     all  vector
                                                                  A desired        with by
                                                                           and parsed
                                                                                  frames   the    six parameters
                                                                                            is conditional
                                                                                                created          parsed of
                                                                                                           andstatements.  by the      trackball state
                                                                                                                                The setTimeout
                                                                                                                                conditional
represents
      method    the  current
                  executes
            statements.     The    position
                                    anonymous
                               thesetTimeout    and
                                                  methodis declared
                                                      function              as anonymous
                                                                    sequentially
                                                              executes    the   a function
                                                                                      at each   variable
                                                                                                 location
                                                                                              function         of awith
                                                                                                              and    native
                                                                                                           sequentially         method
                                                                                                                           a specific
                                                                                                                          at  each        time
                                                                                                                                     location ofstep
                                                                                                                                                 3DHOP
for animations.
            and
      (Figure      with
                12).  The Thus,
                             specific
                          a syntax   an    array
                                      oftime
                                          the step with
                                                     (Figure
                                              subtitles’         12).desired
                                                               all     The syntax
                                                             synchronization       frames
                                                                                      of the is
                                                                                    exploits         created
                                                                                               subtitles’
                                                                                                a conditional    and     parsed
                                                                                                             synchronization
                                                                                                                   statement          by
                                                                                                                                  exploits
                                                                                                                                 and         conditional
                                                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                       setInterval,
      another
statements. conditional
                 JavaScript statement
                  The setTimeout          and
                                time function  setInterval,
                                            method as well.     another
                                                                The
                                                         executes        theJavaScript
                                                                      sequence     of the
                                                                                anonymoustime  function
                                                                                           various      descriptions
                                                                                                   function as well.    is sequence
                                                                                                                      The  executed
                                                                                                                 sequentially        atofat the
                                                                                                                                         eachspecific
                                                                                                                                                 location
            various
      intervals        descriptions
                   until   the   end    is
                                       of  executed
                                           the  tour.  at specific
                                                        Whenever      intervals
                                                                         the      until
                                                                               function theofend
                                                                                               the of  the tour.
                                                                                                      automatic   Whenever
                                                                                                                    navigation the  function
                                                                                                                                     is called   the
and with a specific time step (Figure 12). The syntax of the subtitles’ synchronization exploits                                                         a
            of the automatic navigation is called the current index is updated according to the time elapsed
      current
conditional      index    is
                  statement  updated       according
                                  and setInterval,        to   the
                                                             anothertime     elapsed
                                                                           JavaScript  between
                                                                                           time      two
                                                                                                    functiontransitions.    The    visibility   and
            between      two transitions.     The visibility      and duration      of each   description     areas   well. by
                                                                                                                   toggled    The thesequence
                                                                                                                                       fadeto       of the
      duration of each description are toggled by the fadeto jQuery event.
various descriptions
         jQuery event. is executed at specific intervals until the end of the tour. Whenever the function
of the automatic navigation is called the current index is updated according to the time elapsed
             var pos = [function() {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([110, -10, 0, 0, 0,
between two1.82]);},
              transitions. The visibility and duration of each description are toggled by the fadeto
                   function() {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([107.82, -20.65, 0, 0, 0,
jQuery event.1.64]);},
                           function() {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([97.96, -13.09, 0, 0, 0,
       var pos 1.30]);},
                = [function() {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([110, -10, 0, 0, 0,
                     function() {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([95.79, -34.17, 0, 0, 0,
       1.82]);},
               1.30]);},
             function()    {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([107.82,
                     function()                                                     -20.65,
                                {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([96.13, -44.60,  0, 0, 0,0, 0, 0,
       1.64]);},
               0.94]);},
                     function()
             function()         {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([106.56, -12.63,
                           {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([97.96,                -0.1, 0,
                                                                                   -13.09,    -0.2,
                                                                                                 0, 0,
               0.01, 0.85]); }]
       1.30]);},
             function()    {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([95.79,
                     var loop = function ()   {                                    -34.17, 0, 0, 0,
       1.30]);},     if (pos.length <= 0)
             function()return;
                           {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([96.13, -44.60, 0, 0, 0,
       0.94]);},     (function chain(i) {
                          if (i >= pos.length || typeof pos[i] !== 'function')
             function() {presenter.animateToTrackballPosition([106.56,
                            return;
                                                                                    -12.63, -0.1, -0.2,
       0.01, 0.85]); }]var tim = window.setTimeout(function() {
                                        pos[i]();
                                  chain(i +()
                var loop = function             1); {
                               }, 1900);
                if (pos.length <= 0)
                         })(0); }
                     return;
                (function
                  Figure
             Figure      12. The
                    12. The   chain(i)
                                 JavaScript
                             JavaScript     {setTimeoutmethod
                                         setTimeout     methoditerates
                                                               iterates “pos”,
                                                                        “pos”,the
                                                                                thearray
                                                                                    arraythat contains
                                                                                           that contains   anonymous
                                                                                                       the the anonymous
                       if (i
                  functions with>=  pos.length
                                 parameter                        pos[i]
                                                        typeofmethod,
                                                    || exposed
                                             a 3DHOP’s                      !==a callback
                                                                                   'function')
                                                                         within            function.
             functions with parameter a 3DHOP’s exposed method, within a callback function.
                          return;
                   var tim = window.setTimeout(function() {
                             pos[i]();
                            chain(i + 1);
                       }, 1900);
                })(0); }
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                                          18 of 26



5.3.2. Interactive Data Retrieval from the 3D Scene
       Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                18 of 26

      The coherence of every single dataset of the Cultural Heritage field, varying from archaeological
      5.3.2. Interactive Data Retrieval from the 3D Scene
recordings to diagnosis or restoration projects depends on its spatial dimension. The individual data,
regardlessThe     coherence
              context,   type and      format,single
                                 of every                 dataset ofwith
                                                  are associated                   Cultural
                                                                            the specific       Heritage
                                                                                           locations         field,physical
                                                                                                                       varyingspace
                                                                                                        in the                    fromof the
      archaeological    recordings     to  diagnosis    or  restoration     projects    depends   on
study area. This apparent connection can convey an accessible role to the users of the 3D platform.   its spatial    dimension.     The
      individual   data,   regardless     context,   type    and   format,    are   associated   with
A strategy to retrieve the whole documentation data of the repository from their corresponding position specific    locations    in  the
      physical space of the study area. This apparent connection can convey an accessible role to the users
on the 3D scene is employed. The idea transforms the conventional text annotations to dynamic
      of the 3D platform. A strategy to retrieve the whole documentation data of the repository from their
feature-linked labels that emerge from the interactive exploration of the 3D space. The tool is developed
      corresponding position on the 3D scene is employed. The idea transforms the conventional text
on a annotations
      cartographic      base, represented
                    to dynamic      feature-linked by the
                                                        labels     model
                                                              3Dthat  emerge  of Meteora      of the homepage.
                                                                                  from the interactive      exploration         the 3D the
                                                                                                                             enhances
                                                                                                                          It of
visualization
      space. The schema     with additional
                   tool is developed               3D viewports
                                           on a cartographic           and
                                                                   base,       establishes
                                                                           represented         the access
                                                                                           by the   3D model  to the    subpages
                                                                                                                  of Meteora         through
                                                                                                                                 of the
interlinks.   Once   enabled,     with    a  smooth     animation        the
      homepage. It enhances the visualization schema with additional 3D viewports and establishes the from
                                                                               camera     frames    a  section    of   the  3D  scene
high access
      angle. toFrom
                  the this   viewpoint
                       subpages      through a wider     area can
                                                 interlinks.     Oncebeenabled,
                                                                          observed       anda the
                                                                                      with          mechanism
                                                                                               smooth      animation      the camera data
                                                                                                                       of interactive
      frames
retrieval      a section
           initiates.     of the of
                       Instead         scene from high
                                  3Dhighlighting              angle. From
                                                        or placing     labels, this  viewpoint
                                                                                  it is proposed     a morearea
                                                                                                  a wider           can beand
                                                                                                               creative      observed
                                                                                                                                 interactive
      and the
approach     formechanism
                  prominent   of and
                                  interactive
                                         distinctdatafrom     theirinitiates.
                                                        retrieval                Instead of
                                                                      surroundings            highlighting
                                                                                            points              or placing
                                                                                                      of interest.            labels, it
                                                                                                                        The indication       is
      is proposed     a  more    creative     and   interactive      approach       for  prominent
provided during moving the cursor on top of the scene. The position where the cursor changes into       and    distinct    from   their
      surroundings points of interest. The indication is provided during moving the cursor on top of the
a hand pointer identifies a landmark whose documentation data can be accessed. This actually means
      scene. The position where the cursor changes into a hand pointer identifies a landmark whose
that there are no constrains on the manipulation of the scene with the mouse.
      documentation data can be accessed. This actually means that there are no constrains on the
      The   user can of
      manipulation     freely   explore
                          the scene                mouse. the cursor’s behavior and select the landmarks that elicit
                                                examine
                                       withit,the
his/her attention.     Once   clicked,      relative
            The user can freely explore it, examine    contextual       information
                                                               the cursor’s                and selecttothe
                                                                               behavior appears           a dialog
                                                                                                              landmarks       on top
                                                                                                                         boxthat  elicitof the
canvas.  The brief
      his/her        description
               attention.             contains
                            Once clicked,         linkscontextual
                                              relative    that redirect                  appearsand
                                                                             to the subpages
                                                                       information                 to athe    photographic
                                                                                                                  box on top collections
                                                                                                         dialog                  of the
        3D platform.
of thecanvas.   The brief Thedescription       passive links
                               static andcontains         knowledge
                                                                  that redirect      to the evolves
                                                                            divulgation      subpagestoand  an interactive
                                                                                                                 the photographicexperience
      collections
and the             of the 3D platform.
          spatial relationship        among the          static and
                                                  Theparticles          passive
                                                                    of the           knowledge
                                                                              platform              divulgation
                                                                                           turns into                  Prior toto
                                                                                                          logical. evolves            an
                                                                                                                                  browsing,
      interactive  experience     and    the  spatial   relationship      among      the  particles
a preview of the redirected page is shown so as the users anticipate and inspect its content before  of  the   platform     turns   into
      logical. Prior to browsing, a preview of the redirected page is shown so as the users anticipate and
the navigation.     At the same time, a customized photographic collection, which can be also displayed
      inspect its content before the navigation. At the same time, a customized photographic collection,
on an independent full-size viewer, is presented on the side panel. Replacing the image collection by
      which can be also displayed on an independent full-size viewer, is presented on the side panel.
a collection    of smaller-scale and more detailed 3D models of the dataset maximizes the platform’s
      Replacing the image collection by a collection of smaller-scale and more detailed 3D models of the
potential.   The  user can the
      dataset maximizes      interact    with the
                                  platform’s         3D assets
                                                 potential.     Thewithin
                                                                     user can       new viewports
                                                                              theinteract   with the 3D or on   their
                                                                                                            assets       subpage’s
                                                                                                                     within   the new  viewer
with viewports
      further functionalities       (Figure 13).
                   or on their subpage’s              Suchwith
                                                  viewer            furthervisualization
                                                              a scalable       functionalities  communicates
                                                                                                  (Figure 13). Such   the documentation
                                                                                                                            a scalable
outputs    that emerge
      visualization         from multiple
                      communicates                 data acquisition
                                          the documentation          outputs    that emergetime
                                                                             techniques,               multipleor
                                                                                                fromperiods         data   acquisitionto the
                                                                                                                        disciplines
simpletechniques,
         user. The  time   periods
                       experts     canor compare
                                          disciplinesand to the  simplethe
                                                              extract       user.
                                                                               topological,        can compare
                                                                                    The expertsdirectional        and                the
                                                                                                                           extractrelations
                                                                                                                     andmetric
      topological,   directional     and     metric   relations     among       multi-resolution
among multi-resolution models. The exploratory analysis of the 3D scene and its supportive dataset is models.      The    exploratory
      analysis ofon
implemented        thetop
                        3Dofscene   and itsmodel
                              Meteora         supportive
                                                       and thedataset   is implemented
                                                                   points     of interest are    the of
                                                                                             on top    sixMeteora              and the
                                                                                                                      modelMonasteries,
                                                                                                            functioning
      points of interest are the six functioning Monasteries, the rock of Pixari and the town of Kalampaka
the rock of Pixari and the town of Kalampaka and Kastraki. Their characteristic position, roof’s
      and Kastraki. Their characteristic position, roof’s color and assembly make them readily apparent
color and assembly make them readily apparent and no highlighted geometry or label is needed for
      and no highlighted geometry or label is needed for interactivity. Under other conditions, a proper
interactivity.   Under other conditions, a proper indication is needed for users’ usability.
      indication is needed for users’ usability.




                                 (a)                                                              (b)

                                                             Figure 13. Cont.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                            19 of 26
      Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                   19 of 26




                                                             (c)
           Figure
      Figure       TheThe
              13. 13.    interactive               tool enables
                                         retrievaltool
                            interactiveretrieval        enables the  accesstotoheterogeneous
                                                                 theaccess      heterogeneousdatadata  via and
                                                                                                   via 2D   2D 3D
                                                                                                               and 3D
      viewports (a) Emulation of the subpage with the detailed documentation of Pixari rockImage
           viewports   (a) Emulation  of  the subpage   with the detailed documentation  of Pixari rock (b)  (b) Image
           collection of Roussanou Monastery (c) 3D models’ collection of St. Stephen’s Monastery.
      collection of Roussanou Monastery (c) 3D models’ collection of St. Stephen’s Monastery.
           The syntax of the new attribute is based on an anonymous JavaScript function and jQuery
     The syntax of the new attribute is based on an anonymous JavaScript function and jQuery events
     events applied to a HTML element of transparent geometry. The screen coordinates are related to
applied to a HTML element of transparent geometry. The screen coordinates are related to the projected
     the projected spatial coordinates of the georeferenced 3D model and the desired positions are stored
spatial coordinates
     in an            of the georeferenced
           array. An anonymous                  3D model
                                  JavaScript function        and the
                                                       is executed    at desired        with are
                                                                                 positions
                                                                         runtime along             storedevent.
                                                                                                          in anItarray.
                                                                                              the hover
An anonymous      JavaScript   function   is executed   at  runtime    along  with   the hover    event.
     tracks the cursor position, parse the array and decide when the modal pop-ups have to be displayed. It tracks the
cursor  position,  parse  the array  and   decide  when    the  modal     pop-ups   have  to be   displayed.
     Three.js library set up the ancillary visualization of the collection of 3D models. HTML elements        Three.js
library setspecific
     with   up the ancillary
                    dimensionsvisualization
                                 are defined of asthe collection
                                                   containers          3Drendering
                                                                forofthe   models. HTML      elements with
                                                                                     and customization         specific
                                                                                                           of the
     Three.js viewer.
dimensions            The 3D
              are defined   asmodels   are multi-resolution
                                containers                    and their
                                              for the rendering      andloading  is managed
                                                                           customization     ofbythe
                                                                                                   Nexus.
                                                                                                      Three.js viewer.
The 3D models are multi-resolution and their loading is managed by Nexus.
      5.3.3. Labeling System
5.3.3. Labeling System
          The most common but efficient way to identify features of the 3D scene is labeling systems. Text
      strings or 2D graphical labels are placed on the surface of the 3D model for interpretation and
      The most common but efficient way to identify features of the 3D scene is labeling systems.
      clarification purposes. The scope and applicability area of this conventional technique is expanded
Text strings or 2D graphical labels are placed on the surface of the 3D model for interpretation and
      by a more flexible and interactive schema with the following characteristics:
clarification purposes. The scope and applicability area of this conventional technique is expanded by
            Clickable
a more flexible    andproperty: The schema
                       interactive                  the labels
                                             select the
                                    user can with              in order
                                                        following       to interact with the objects of other 3D
                                                                    characteristics:
      viewers and the content of the page.
     Clickable
          Back-endproperty:
                       support:The   user
                                  Text    can select the
                                        descriptions, geographic     order to interact
                                                          labels incoordinates         with
                                                                                and other     the objects
                                                                                           attributes     of other 3D
                                                                                                      associated
     withand
viewers   eachthe   content
                 label         of the
                                    in page.
                        are stored     a database.
     Back-end     support: Text
          It is implemented         descriptions,
                                in the              the interiorcoordinates
                                        3D model ofgeographic                  and other
                                                                 of the old catholikon    attributes
                                                                                              Stephenassociated
                                                                                       of St.         monastery with
each in
     label  are  stored   in a  database.
        the context of the Three.js visualization pipeline. Parts of the Orthodox Church architecture,
      frescoes and other decorative details are delineated and described. Simple spheres or planes are
      It is implemented in the 3D model of the interior of the old catholikon of St. Stephen monastery in
      placed on the desired positions and a piece of text identifies each semantic region. The tags appear in
the context of the Three.js visualization pipeline. Parts of the Orthodox Church architecture, frescoes
      such a way that they are always on the field of view of the camera. As the user manipulates the scene
and other     decorative
      by zooming,       pandetails    are delineated
                              or rotating,     the text and anddescribed.    Simple spheres
                                                                 graphics attached              or planes
                                                                                        on it adjust       are placed
                                                                                                       to the           on the
                                                                                                                real-time
desired    positions   and   a  piece   of text   identifies
      transformations. Equivalent user’s modifications of the 3D view adjust the visibility of the church’sa way
                                                               each   semantic    region.   The  tags appear   in such
that they    are always
      framing.             on the
                  The walls,    the field  of view
                                     ceiling  and the of the  camera.
                                                          floor         As the user
                                                                are becoming                once theythe
                                                                                       manipulates
                                                                                  invisible             face the by
                                                                                                          scene      zooming,
                                                                                                                  camera
pan or   rotating, the text
      preventing               and graphics
                          obscuring     of critical  interioron
                                                 attached        it adjust
                                                               parts.  The to  the real-time
                                                                            clickable  propertytransformations.    Equivalent
                                                                                                  enables two dynamic
user’sactions   in the subpage:
        modifications      of theanimations
                                   3D view adjustof the the
                                                         3DHOP’s     scene
                                                              visibility    the content
                                                                         of and   church’supdate  of the
                                                                                            framing.        walls, When
                                                                                                         subpage.
                                                                                                       The          the ceiling
      user   selects a  sphere,  the   camera    of the  exterior  3D   model   frames  the  equivalent
and the floor are becoming invisible once they face the camera preventing the obscuring of critical      position  with a
interior parts. The clickable property enables two dynamic actions in the subpage: animations of the
3DHOP’s scene and content update of the subpage. When user selects a sphere, the camera of the
mouse position on the screen to the 3D scene. An anonymous function detects the sphere that the ray
intersects within an accepted distance threshold and returns the point of collision. The label is
created at this position based on the procedural text geometry of Three.js. The interaction with
3DHOP and HTML document is controlled by the JavaScript switch statement. Each clickable sphere
is a case
Remote Sens. that  invokes
             2019, 11, 2508 specific statements involving a native animation function of 3DHOP  and
                                                                                             20 of 26
jQuery events. As regards to the back-end configuration, the text strings and the coordinates are
retrieved and accessed by the query operations of MongoDB, a NoSQL database. AJAX requests are
exterior 3D model frames the equivalent position with a smooth transition and a customized image
sent to the server, get the aggregated data as JSON format then parse it and give input to the user
gallery is shown (Figure 14). The index of the labels can be dynamically toggled as well with the
interface. The connection between AJAX and database is handled by a server-side scripting
geospatial coordinates of the center of the sphere.
language, PHP.




                                                         (a)




                                                         (b)
       Figure 14. (a) Text and graphic labels on the interior of the church and (b) the result of a click event
     Figure 14. (a) Text and graphic labels on the interior of the church and (b) the result of a click event to
       to a point of interest .
     a point of interest.

     The text label assignment is not a simple programming task when it is independent of pre-built
components and interferes with the 3D space. The HTML canvas element that hosts the 3DHOP’s
viewer, cannot display at runtime both 2D and 3D context. This shortage can be handled by Three.js
library. It’s ray casting method determines the clickable geometry by projecting a ray from the mouse
position on the screen to the 3D scene. An anonymous function detects the sphere that the ray intersects
within an accepted distance threshold and returns the point of collision. The label is created at this
position based on the procedural text geometry of Three.js. The interaction with 3DHOP and HTML
document is controlled by the JavaScript switch statement. Each clickable sphere is a case that invokes
specific statements involving a native animation function of 3DHOP and jQuery events. As regards to
the back-end configuration, the text strings and the coordinates are retrieved and accessed by the query
operations of MongoDB, a NoSQL database. AJAX requests are sent to the server, get the aggregated
data as JSON format then parse it and give input to the user interface. The connection between AJAX
and database is handled by a server-side scripting language, PHP.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                        21 of 26



6. Evaluation
     The web-based visualization of large and high-resolution 3D models requires a robust bandwidth,
high hardware performance and fast data transmission in order to be optimized. The network speed
of 12 Mbp/sec that ISPs typically provide is adequate for streaming 3D content without the risk of
congestion. With WebGL API, GPU resources are directly accessed while transferring and rendering
the 3D data. Therefore, the latency’s factor outweighs the other two regarding the 3D platform’s
performance. The loading time gets even more important in the case of non-specialized users that
are not disposed towards slow loading times, poor frame rates and delays in the visualization.
Such a website is quickly abandoned and characterized as a bad user experience. The performance
analysis is a crucial insight for the effectiveness of the developed tools and data structure and their
impact to the 3D platform’s general responsiveness. Browser developer tools are used and all testing is
done locally, with client and server running on the same network infrastructure. The test is executed
on a conventional laptop with an Intel Dual Core i5-7200, CPU at 2.50 GHz, 8 GB of RAM and AMD
Radeon ™ 520 Graphics (2 GB DDR3 exclusively), in Windows 10. Bandwidth throttling is used to
simulate network download speed of 10 Mbit / s and the upload rate up to 0.7 Mbit/s. The throttling
takes into account possible low bandwidths and latencies due to external network interference. The test
results are executed by the DevTools in the latest version of three browsers (Google Chrome, Mozilla
Firefox, and Microsoft Edge) and are presented in Table 2.

                  Table 2. Comparing 3D platform’s pages loading time on three major browsers.

                              Browser         Homepage        Subpage 1       Subpage 2
                        Google Chrome 77        4.98 s           1.50 s          3.87 s
                        Microsoft Edge 44       4.93 s           1.31 s          3.94 s
                        Mozilla Firefox 69      4.80 s           1.36 s          3.73 s


     In less than five seconds the homepage of the platform that comprises the largest amount of data
needed from the default point of view are fully loaded. An equivalent excellent performance attains
the subpages. The ideal website load time ranges from two to five seconds and a further delay in
loading process impacts user engagement and the overall usability. The current speed marginally
affects the performance but its optimization is a prerequisite in case of updating platform’s content with
more data or several paradigms. Further analysis is needed to investigate which resources consume
the most network load and to what extent they affect the overall loading speed of the 3D platform.
Besides the XHR requests and responses, the multimedia assets likely consume lots of bandwidth and
start-up time may be affected by code syntax and structure. The Network Monitor of Develop Tools
includes a performance analysis tool in order to determine how long the browser takes to download
these different parts of the website. The tool loads each page with an empty cache simulating the first
time a user visits it. The metrics for the cached content are summarized in Figure 15. The resources are
grouped by type and chart (a) illustrates the loading time and chart (b) the relative size of each type.
     The time taken in delivering the requested data, namely the xhr type, has the largest impact
on platform’s responsiveness. The multi-resolution format and its rendering technique account
considerably for this delay. Each request transfers a sufficient amount of each model’s partitions for
the composition of the final 3D model. The streaming of the different versions of the 3D models at
variable resolution is carried out by consecutive requests and browser-side responses. Instead of
delivering a single chunk on the order of hundreds of megabytes, the view-dependent visualization
leads to balanced compression and decompression rates and progressive loading. The efficacy of this
mechanism to the overall performance is demonstrated in the considerable small size of xhr resources,
as can be observed in the second chart of Figure 15.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                                   22 of 26
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                      22 of 26


    1                                                                  60
  0.9
                                                                       50
  0.8
  0.7                                                                  40
  0.6
  0.5                                                                  30
  0.4                                                                  20
  0.3
  0.2                                                                  10
  0.1
                                                                          0
    0
                                                                                    xhr   images       js        css       html




                                                                        Size (MB)
                 xhr   images     js        css       html
    Time (sec)




                                                                                           Homepage                 Subpage 1


                                (a)                                                                 (b)
            Figure 15. Cashed content used normally for each page of the platform:
                                                                         platform: (a) Resources loading time
                                               (MB).
            (sec) (b) Size of data transferred (MB).

      The images consume the largest portion of the average platform’s pay-load on the web which is
unsurprising       consideringtheir
unsurprising considering                quality
                                    their    quality     and initial
                                                  levellevel          size. JavaScript
                                                               and initial                   scripts constitute
                                                                                size. JavaScript                     also expensive
                                                                                                         scripts constitute       also
expensive       they require
resources asresources           downloading,
                           as they                 parsing and compiling
                                       require downloading,         parsing and                        prior to An
                                                                                         to their execution.
                                                                                 priorcompiling                        optimization
                                                                                                                   their  execution.
strategy
An         for the website
     optimization       strategyresponsiveness
                                     for the websiteand usability    involvesand
                                                           responsiveness                usability modifications:
                                                                                   the following       involves the following
      Compressing the multi-resolution models following their creation on the post-processing phase
modifications:
for faster  streamingthe
      Compressing        andmulti-resolution
                                adaptive rendering. models                 theircomprises
                                                               Nexus library
                                                          Thefollowing              creation on  antheefficient   compression
                                                                                                          post-processing         and
                                                                                                                                phase
decompression
for faster streamingmethod and asadaptive     rendering.Three.js
                                  well as a dedicated               loader.
                                                            The Nexus          The good
                                                                           library          compression
                                                                                       comprises               rates, the
                                                                                                      an efficient         reduction
                                                                                                                       compression
of original
and  decompression         and the relative
              files’ size method      as well as high  decompression
                                                    a dedicated    Three.jsspeed      attain
                                                                                loader.          goodperformance.
                                                                                          Thebetter      compression rates, the
      Optimizing
reduction             the front-end
             of original    files’ sizearchitecture,
                                         and the relative     highinline
                                                         moving            scripts andspeed
                                                                    decompression                     into external
                                                                                           stylingattain                files, jQuery
                                                                                                             better performance.
reformats    syntax or
      Optimizing       thereplaces
                             front-endthe architecture,
                                           long lines of code
                                                            moving       shorter
                                                                  withinline      scripts   and Curtailing
                                                                                     versions.     styling into        inline scripts
                                                                                                                  theexternal    files,
and using
jQuery       AJAX methods
                       syntax orfor
          reformats                 replaces    the longthe
                                       manipulation           page
                                                           lines     content
                                                                 of code    with    shorterthe
                                                                                 improve          overallCurtailing
                                                                                                              page loading.
                                                                                               versions.                   the inline
      Minifying
scripts   and using andAJAX
                          compressing
                                   methods  images    before adding the
                                                for manipulation        them            determining
                                                                                 and content
                                                                              page                improve        dimensions
                                                                                                          their the              so as
                                                                                                                       overall page
not to reflow the content while loading. Single image caching can assist decrease pare latency while
loading.
loading.    Delivering
      Minifying           the files responsively
                    and compressing                   also improves
                                            images before     adding themperformance        for the smaller
                                                                                 and determining                  screens of tablets
                                                                                                          their dimensions       so as
andto
not  smartphones.
        reflow the content while loading. Single image caching can assist decrease pare latency while
      Finally,
loading.    Delivering     the filesofresponsively
                a demonstration          the visualizationalsoefficiency        the multi-resolution
                                                                improvesofperformance             for themethod           conducted
                                                                                                              smalleris screens      of
in a section
tablets  and of   the 3D model of Meteora. The parameters of this specific frame of the scene are stored in
               smartphones.
a vector   and set
      Finally,       as the default view.
                  a demonstration         of theWithvisualization     0.5 s from the
                                                       time step of efficiency             homepage’s
                                                                                      of the                 startup the
                                                                                                 multi-resolution           stages of
                                                                                                                          method     is
the visualization
conducted              refinement
              in a section    of the 3D    recorded
                                      are model         (Figure 16).
                                                    of Meteora.    TheAt   initial loading
                                                                         parameters       of this(0.5  s), a low-resolution
                                                                                                    specific    frame of the sceneand
“rough”
are stored version           3D model
                     of theand
             in a vector                  is already
                                  set as the   defaultvisible
                                                         view. in the time
                                                                With    homepage.
                                                                               step ofThe0.5 speed
                                                                                              s fromof  therendering
                                                                                                             homepage’s and loading
                                                                                                                              startup
the  stages of the
is remarkable      as atvisualization
                          two secondsrefinement
                                            after homepage are recorded
                                                                 launch the   (Figure     16). At initial
                                                                                  high-resolution         model loading
                                                                                                                    is well(0.5  s), a
                                                                                                                             defined.
low-resolution
The  stages of the  and   “rough” version
                       progressive     refinement     can3D
                                                 of the    bemodel
                                                               observedis already
                                                                            in Figure  visible
                                                                                          15. The    lowhomepage.
                                                                                                in the                    The speed
                                                                                                            analysis corresponds
to rendering
of               and loading
   the less detailed              is remarkable
                         and smaller                as at two
                                          data chunks           seconds
                                                           of the           after homepage
                                                                   multi-resolution         schema      and the high-resolution
                                                                                                   launch          visualization is
model
improved is well   defined. The stages of the progressive refinement can be observed in Figure 15. The
             on-the-fly.
low analysis corresponds to the less detailed and smaller data chunks of the multi-resolution schema
and the visualization is improved on-the-fly.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                                      23 of 26
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                                         23 of 26




                                 (a)                                                                (b)




                                 (c)                                                                (d)
      Figure   16. Visualization
      Figure 16.                  resultsofofaadetail
                                                detailofofthe
                    Visualizationresults                      3D3D
                                                            the  model of of
                                                                   model     Meteora
                                                                          Meteora after (a) (a)
                                                                                            0.5 0.5
                                                                                     after                          (c)s1.5
                                                                                                          s, 1(c)s,1.5
                                                                                                    s, 1(b)
                                                                                                s, (b)                   ands
      and  (d)  2 s from homepage
      (d) 2 s from homepage launch.  launch.

7. Conclusions
7. Conclusions
       The developed
       The    developedplatform
                              platformaims   aimsto atocentralized   and sophisticated
                                                          a centralized      and sophisticated  visualization      of diverse
                                                                                                         visualization       of heritage
                                                                                                                                  diverse
heritage data emphasizing on user interaction and knowledge dissemination. Therefore,of the
 data  emphasizing        on  user  interaction      and   knowledge      dissemination.        Therefore,     the  capabilities       the
 3DHOP platform
capabilities     of the are   extended
                           3DHOP             with new
                                      platform             interactive
                                                     are extended     withfeatures     and manipulation
                                                                              new interactive         featuresmechanisms
                                                                                                                   and manipulationof the
 3D  scene.   The    introduction     of  two    new    types  of tools,   the  automatic
mechanisms of the 3D scene. The introduction of two new types of tools, the automatic navigationnavigation      and   the  scene-based
 search
and   theand     retrieval, search
           scene-based        providesandcritical      oversight
                                              retrieval,   provides    the 3D oversight
                                                                    of critical    space andofthe   thespatial
                                                                                                          3D space interconnection
                                                                                                                        and the spatial of
 the information that
interconnection               clarifies
                         of the          it. The textual
                                  information                  and graphical
                                                     that clarifies                 labels depict
                                                                       it. The textual                 an additional
                                                                                               and graphical         labelsinformation
                                                                                                                              depict an
 layer  that  enables     characterization        and   instant  identification      in  the  context
additional information layer that enables characterization and instant identification in the context      of the   plenteous     cultural
                                                                                                                                        of
 and  historical     assets.  Finally,   the   incorporation      of the   Three.js     viewer     proves
the plenteous cultural and historical assets. Finally, the incorporation of the Three.js viewer proves       that   two   visualization
that  two of
 systems        different specifications,
            visualization      systems of differenttechnical   backgrounds
                                                            specifications,        and capabilities
                                                                               technical     backgrounds   can be      capabilitiesinto
                                                                                                                 andsynthesized        can
abecohesive    solution.    The  successful     implementation        of  these
    synthesized into a cohesive solution. The successful implementation of these features rests of
                                                                                 features     rests  upon    the   effectiveness       the
                                                                                                                                    upon
 designed
the         programming
      effectiveness       of thesystem
                                   designed      its ability to respond
                                           and programming          system  to parallel
                                                                                and its and      dynamic
                                                                                           ability            actions.toThe
                                                                                                      to respond              JavaScript
                                                                                                                           parallel   and
programming         language     endorses      web   development      with    high-tech
dynamic actions. The JavaScript programming language endorses web development with high-techfeatures    and   is  recommended        to be
 used  to dynamically        manipulate       the   content   of digital   Cultural     Heritage
features and is recommended to be used to dynamically manipulate the content of digital Cultural     repositories.     The   evaluation
 of the platform
Heritage               is held by
              repositories.      Thea performance
                                        evaluation ofanalysis         by measuring
                                                              the platform        is heldthebyloading        time of each
                                                                                                    a performance              page and
                                                                                                                           analysis     by
 examining      the   network    load   of  its resources.
measuring the loading time of each page and examining the network load of its resources.
       The intrinsic
       The                 openness of
             intrinsic openness              the platform
                                        of the    platform is  is appealing
                                                                  appealing to   to simple       users and
                                                                                      simple users              profits the
                                                                                                         and profits      the scientific
                                                                                                                               scientific
 community       by  identifying,   retrieving      and  re-using  the  cultural    resources.
community by identifying, retrieving and re-using the cultural resources. The cognitive and        The  cognitive     and  navigational
navigational         the deeper
 tools facilitatetools              and
                           facilitate         deepercomprehension
                                       thebroader                           of the physical,ofhistorical
                                                         and broader comprehension                   the physical,and archaeological
                                                                                                                         historical and
archaeological         aspects ofobjects
 aspects of the presented                      by the non-domain
                                     the presented         objects by the  experts.     Similarly,
                                                                                non-domain             it fosters
                                                                                                    experts.         collaboration
                                                                                                                 Similarly,             on
                                                                                                                               it fosters
 information      sharing    and   synergies     across   a wider   range    of  disciplines,
collaboration on information sharing and synergies across a wider range of disciplines, including including      engineering,     natural
 science, education,
engineering,       naturalmedia      andeducation,
                              science,       economics.      It efficiently
                                                           media               addressesItemerging
                                                                    and economics.              efficientlyissues
                                                                                                                addresses       Cultural
                                                                                                                       of the emerging
 Heritage
issues        field,
         of the   Cultural                field, such as risk disaster
                              as risk characterization,
                        such Heritage                                         management
                                                                  characterization,       disaster and    landscape and
                                                                                                      management         dynamics
                                                                                                                              landscape by
dynamics by anthropogenic and physical factors. Structural analysis can be performed to 3D structures,
 anthropogenic        and   physical   factors.     Structural   analysis    can   be  performed       to  3D   structures,   BIMs    and
BIMs
 CAD and     CAD models
         models      regardlessregardless     of geometric
                                    of geometric                complexity,
                                                         complexity,           loading
                                                                         loading           conditions
                                                                                       conditions      or or  materialtype.
                                                                                                                          type. Seismic
                                                                                                            material              Seismic
vulnerability, structural behavior, damage phenomena and other pathological              pathological changes
                                                                                                           changes can can be
                                                                                                                            be precisely
represented and measured on multi-LOD or time-series datasets. Their perception and interpretation is
amplified by the use of the platform’s interactive and metric tools in virtue of their spatial consistency.
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                   24 of 26



represented and measured on multi-LOD or time-series datasets. Their perception and interpretation is
amplified by the use of the platform’s interactive and metric tools in virtue of their spatial consistency.
Alternatively, view-based indexing and real-time segmentation are supported utilities for identification,
monitoring and diagnosis of all 3D modeling formats. Its programming and styling principles could lie
at the core of web virtual and augmented reality or supply other online repositories with predefined
functions and design mechanisms. The following suggestions are made regarding further extensions
and optimization plans of the presented work:
     Linking a relational database would provide semantically enhanced access to the existing digital
resources. The back-end scheme that was partially implemented for the labeling system showcases
the viability and practically of server-side configuration for visualization enrichment. Pre-processing
geometric classification, annotations and management of the manifold content on a conceptual
framework are incomplete at this development stage.
     The responsiveness of the developed tools on low-end and mid-range mobile devices could be
examined to ensure that access and applicability are not restricted. Transitioning from React.js to React
Native development is a proposed approach that could wrap Three.js functionalities and the associated
data in a cross-platform application.
     The dynamic multimedia integration, its correlation strategies with the 3D scene and the navigation
mechanisms could formulate mid-level solutions and define a higher programming level. Therefore,
the platform would undertake the role of a web service or framework. With simple and automated
procedures, they could be exploited by any user, regardless of programming skills as native utility
functions for effortless customization.
     Investigating the compatibility and performance of ancillary data encodings and development
platforms is recommended for the optimum visualization schema to attain immersive user’s
experience. It is suggested to experiment with the multi-resolution format and progressive or
compression techniques and test the combination use of interfaces and libraries of both imperative and
declarative programming.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.-M.B. and S.S.; Data curation, C.I. and S.S.; Funding acquisition, C.I.
and S.S.; Methodology, A.-M.B.; Project administration, C.I. and S.S.; Resources, C.I. and S.S.; Software, A.-M.B.;
Supervision, C.I.; Visualization, A.-M.B.; Writing–original draft, A.-M.B. and S.S.; Writing–review & editing,
A.-M.B. and C.I.
Funding: This research has been co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational
Program Competiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH–CREATE–INNOVATE
(project code: T1E∆K-02859).
Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the society for the preservation and promotion of the Meteora
Heritage “Meteoron Lithopolis” for multimedia provision and free access to useful information.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Dall’Asta, A.; Leoni, G.; Meschini, A.; Petrucci, E.; Zona, A. Integrated approach for seismic vulnerability
      analysis of historic massive defensive structures. J. Cult. Herit. 2019, 35, 86–98. [CrossRef]
2.    Fortunato, G.; Funari, M.F.; Lonetti, P. Survey and seismic vulnerability assessment of the baptistery of san
      giovanni in tumba (Italy). J. Cult. Herit. 2017, 26, 64–78. [CrossRef]
3.    Moraitou, E.; Aliprantis, J.; Christodoulou, Y.; Teneketzis, A.; Caridakis, G. Semantic Bridging of Cultural
      Heritage Disciplines and Tasks. Heritage 2019, 2, 611–630. [CrossRef]
4.    Freire, N.; Voorburg, R.; Cornelissen, R.; de Valk, S.; Meijers, E.; Isaac, A. Aggregation of Linked Data in the
      Cultural Heritage Domain: A Case Study in the Europeana Network. Information 2019, 10, 252. [CrossRef]
5.    M’Darhri, A.A.; Baillet, V.; Bourineau, B.; Calantropio, A.; Carpentiero, G.; Chayani, M. Share-Publish-
      Store-Preserve. Methodologies, Tools and Challenges for 3D Use in Social Sciences and Humanities; PARTHENOS:
      Marseille, France, 2019; p. 94.
6.    Jensen, P. Semantically Enhanced 3D: A Web-Based Platform for Spatial Integration of Excavation
      Documentation at Alken Enge, Denmark. J. Field Archaeol. 2018, 43, S31–S44. [CrossRef]
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                       25 of 26



7.     Carraro, F.; Marinello, A.; Morabito, D.; Bonetto, J. New Perspectives on the Sanctuary of Aesculapius in
       Nora (Sardinia): From Photogrammetry to Visualizing and Querying Tools. Open Archaeol. 2019, 5, 263–273.
       [CrossRef]
8.     Reddy, M.; Leclerc, Y.; Iverson, L.; Bletter, N. TerraVision II: Visualizing Massive Terrain Databases in VRML.
       IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 1999, 19, 30–38. [CrossRef]
9.     Three.js. Available online: https://threejs.org/ (accessed on 17 October 2019).
10.    Babylon.js. Available online: https://www.babylonjs.com/ (accessed on 17 October 2019).
11.    SceneJS. Available online: http://scenejs.org/ (accessed on 17 October 2019).
12.    Schütz, M. Potree: Rendering Large Point Clouds in Web Browsers. Diploma Thesis, Vienna University of
      Technology, Vienna, Austria, 2016; p. 92.
13.    Potenziani, M.; Callieri, M.; Dellepiane, M.; Corsini, M.; Ponchio, F.; Scopigno, R. 3DHOP: 3D Heritage
       Online Presenter. Comput. Graph. 2015, 52, 129–141. [CrossRef]
14.    Behr, J.; Eschler, P.; Jung, Y.; Zöllner, M. X3DOM: A DOM-Based HTML5/X3D Integration Model.
       In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on 3D Web Technology—Web3D ’09, Darmstadt,
       Germany, 16–17 June 2009; ACM Press: Darmstadt, Germany, 2009; p. 127. [CrossRef]
15.    Potenziani, M.; Callieri, M.; Dellepiane, M.; Scopigno, R. Publishing and Consuming 3D Content on the Web:
      A Survey. FNT Comput. Graph. Vis. 2018, 10, 244–333. [CrossRef]
16.    Mwalongo, F.; Krone, M.; Reina, G.; Ertl, T. State-of-the-art report in web-based visualization. Comput. Graph.
      Forum 2016, 35, 553–575. [CrossRef]
17.    Evans, A.; Romeo, M.; Bahrehmand, A.; Agenjo, J.; Blat, J. 3D Graphics on the Web: A Survey. Comput. Graph.
       2014, 41, 43–61. [CrossRef]
18.    Scopigno, R.; Callieri, M.; Dellepiane, M.; Ponchio, F.; Potenziani, M. Delivering and Using 3D Models on the
      Web: Are We Ready? Virtual Archaeol. Rev. 2017, 8, 1–9. [CrossRef]
19.    Barrettara, M. New Methods for Sharing and Exhibiting 3D Archaeology. Posthole 2013, 31, 8–13.
20.    Statham, N. Scientific Rigour of Online Platforms for 3D Visualization of Heritage. Virtual Archaeol. Rev.
       2019, 10, 1–16. [CrossRef]
21.    Rodríguez-Gonzálvez, P.; Guerra Campo, Á.; Muñoz-Nieto, Á.; Sánchez-Aparicio, L.; González-Aguilera, D.
       Diachronic Reconstruction and Visualization of Lost Cultural Heritage Sites. ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2019, 8, 61.
       [CrossRef]
22.    Abate, D.; Avgousti, A.; Faka, M.; Hermon, S.; Bakirtzis, N.; Christofi, P. An online 3d database system
       for endangered architectural and archaeological heritage in the south-eastern mediterranean. Int. Arch.
      Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2017, XLII-2/W3, 1–8. [CrossRef]
23.    Galeazzi, F.; Callieri, M.; Dellepiane, M.; Charno, M.; Richards, J.; Scopigno, R. Web-Based Visualization for
       3D Data in Archaeology: The ADS 3D Viewer. J. Archaeol. Sci. Rep. 2016, 9, 1–11. [CrossRef]
24.    Lucci Baldassari, G.; Demetrescu, E.; Pescarin, S.; Eriksson, J.; Graf, H. Behind Livia’s Villa: A Case Study for
       the Devolution of Large Scale Interactive “in-Site” to “on-Line” Application. In Design, User Experience, and
      Usability. Web, Mobile, and Product Design; Marcus, A., Hutchison, D., Kanade, T., Kittler, J., Kleinberg, J.M.,
       Mattern, F., Mitchell, J.C., Naor, M., Nierstrasz, O., Pandu Rangan, C., et al., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
       Germany, 2013; Volume 8015, pp. 238–247. [CrossRef]
25.    Krämer, M.; Gutbell, R. A Case Study on 3D Geospatial Applications in the Web Using State-of-the-Art
      WebGL Frameworks. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on 3D Web Technology—Web3D
      ’15, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 18–21 June 2015; ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2015; pp. 189–197. [CrossRef]
26.    Hristov, P.I.; Petkov, E.G. Approach for mesh optimization and 3d web visualization. East. Acad. J. 2018,
       3, 46–52.
27.    Callieri, M.; Leoni, C.; Dellepiane, M.; Scopigno, R. Artworks Narrating a Story: A Modular Framework
       for the Integrated Presentation of Three-Dimensional and Textual Contents. In Proceedings of the 18th
       International Conference on 3D Web Technology—Web3D ’13, San Sebastian, Spain, 20–22 June 2013; ACM
       Press: New York, NY, USA, 2013; p. 167. [CrossRef]
28.    Mi, X.; Pollock, B.M. Metadata Schema to Facilitate Linked Data for 3D Digital Models of Cultural Heritage
       Collections: A University of South Florida Libraries Case Study. Cat. Classif. Q. 2018, 56, 273–286. [CrossRef]
Remote Sens. 2019, 11, 2508                                                                                     26 of 26



29.   Lloyd, J. Contextualizing 3D Cultural Heritage. In Digital Heritage. Progress in Cultural Heritage: Documentation,
      Preservation, and Protection; Ioannides, M., Fink, E., Moropoulou, A., Hagedorn-Saupe, M., Fresa, A., Liestøl, G.,
      Rajcic, V., Grussenmeyer, P., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2016; Volume 10058,
      pp. 859–868. [CrossRef]
30.   Ubik, S.; Kubišta, J. Scalable Real-Time Sharing of 3D Model Visualizations for Group Collaboration.
      In Cooperative Design, Visualization, and Engineering; Luo, Y., Ed.; Springer International Publishing:
      Cham, Switzerland, 2017; Volume 10451, pp. 244–251. [CrossRef]
31.   Bezzi, L.; Bezzi, A.; Boscaro, C.; Feistmantl, K.; Gietl, R.; Naponiello, G.; Ottati, F.; de Guzman, M. Commercial
      Archaeology and 3D Web Technologies. J. Field Archaeol. 2018, 43, S45–S59. [CrossRef]
32.   Siddeq, M.M.; Rodrigues, M.A. Novel 3D Compression Methods for Geometry, Connectivity and Texture.
      3D Res. 2016, 7, 13. [CrossRef]
33.   Alliez, P.; Desbrun, M. Progressive Compression for Lossless Transmission of Triangle Meshes. In Proceedings
      of the 28th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques—SIGGRAPH ’01, Los
      Angeles, CA, USA, 12–17 August 2001; ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2001; pp. 195–202. [CrossRef]
34.   Gobbetti, E.; Marton, F.; Rodriguez, M.B.; Ganovelli, F.; Di Benedetto, M. Adaptive Quad Patches: An Adaptive
      Regular Structure for Web Distribution and Adaptive Rendering of 3D Models. In Proceedings of the 17th
      International Conference on 3D Web Technology—Web3D ’12, Los Angeles, CA, USA, 4–5 August 2012;
      ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2012; p. 9. [CrossRef]
35.   Lavoué, G.; Chevalier, L.; Dupont, F. Streaming Compressed 3D Data on the Web Using JavaScript and
      WebGL. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on 3D Web Technology—Web3D ’13, San
      Sebastian, Spain, 20–22 June 2013; ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2013; p. 19. [CrossRef]
36.   Ponchio, F.; Dellepiane, M. Fast Decompression for Web-Based View-Dependent 3D Rendering.
      In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on 3D Web Technology—Web3D ’15, Heraklion,
      Crete, Greece, 18–21 June 2015; ACM Press: New York, NY, USA, 2015; pp. 199–207. [CrossRef]
37.   Limper, M.; Jung, Y.; Behr, J.; Alexa, M. The POP Buffer: Rapid Progressive Clustering by Geometry
      Quantization. Comput. Graph. Forum 2013, 32, 197–206. [CrossRef]
38.   Potenziani, M.; Callieri, M.; Scopigno, R. Developing and Maintaining a Web 3D Viewer for the CH
      Community: An Evaluation of the 3DHOP Framework. In Proceedings of the Eurographics Workshop on
      Graphics and Cultural Heritage, Vienna, Austria, 12–15 November 2018; pp. 169–178. [CrossRef]
39.   Di Benedetto, M.; Corsini, M.; Scopigno, R. Spidergl: A Graphics Library for 3d Web Applications. Int. Arch.
      Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2012, XXXVIII-5/W16, 467–474. [CrossRef]
40.   Boutsi, A.-M.; Ioannidis, C.; Soile, S. INTERACTIVE ONLINE VISUALIZATION OF COMPLEX 3D
      GEOMETRIES. ISPRS Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci. 2019, XLII-2/W9, 173–180. [CrossRef]

                          © 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                          article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                          (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
