                                           FOCUS FEATURE:
                                           Bridging Scales and Levels


                                           NeuroCave: A web-based immersive visualization
                                             platform for exploring connectome datasets
                                                                  Johnson J. G. Keiriz1,4 , Liang Zhan2,4 , Olusola Ajilore3,4 ,
                                                                        Alex D. Leow1,3,4 , and Angus G. Forbes1,4,5
                                                              1
                                                                Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
                                                      2
                                                        Department of Engineering and Technology, University of Wisconsin–Stout Menomonie, WI, USA
                                                                  3
                                                                    Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
                                                 4
                                                   Collaborative Neuroimaging Environment for Connectomics, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
                                                         5
                                                           Computational Media Department, University of California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA, USA



                                           Keywords: Connectome visualization, Immersive analytics, Intrinsic geometry, Network analysis
an open access                journal


                                           ABSTRACT
                                           We introduce NeuroCave, a novel immersive visualization system that facilitates the visual
                                           inspection of structural and functional connectome datasets. The representation of the
                                           human connectome as a graph enables neuroscientists to apply network-theoretic
                                           approaches in order to explore its complex characteristics. With NeuroCave, brain
                                           researchers can interact with the connectome—either in a standard desktop environment or
                                           while wearing portable virtual reality headsets (such as Oculus Rift, Samsung Gear, or
                                           Google Daydream VR platforms)—in any coordinate system or topological space, as well as
                                           cluster brain regions into different modules on-demand. Furthermore, a default side-by-side
                                           layout enables simultaneous, synchronized manipulation in 3D, utilizing modern GPU
Citation: Keiriz, J. J. G., Zhan, L.,      hardware architecture, and facilitates comparison tasks across different subjects or diagnostic
Ajilore, O., Leow A. D., & Forbes, A. G.
(2018). NeuroCave: A web-based             groups or longitudinally within the same subject. Visual clutter is mitigated using a
immersive visualization platform for
exploring connectome datasets.             state-of-the-art edge bundling technique and through an interactive layout strategy, while
Network Neuroscience, 2(3), 344–361.       modular structure is optimally positioned in 3D exploiting mathematical properties of
https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00044
                                           platonic solids. NeuroCave provides new functionality to support a range of analysis tasks
DOI:                                       not available in other visualization software platforms.
https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00044

Supporting Information:                    AUTHOR SUMMARY
https://dx.doi.org/10.7910/DVN/PQ6ILM
                                           NeuroCave is a web-based software application that facilitates the exploration of and
Received: 24 July 2017
Accepted: 10 January 2018                  comparison between connectome datasets in virtual reality environments. This article
                                           describes the visualization features provided by NeuroCave, enabling clinical neuroscientists
Competing Interests: The authors have
declared that no competing interests       to investigate connectome datasets in a ﬂexible manner, to detect patterns within
exist.                                     connectome data, and to generate hypotheses about these observations. NeuroCave is open
Corresponding Author:                      source software freely available via our GitHub code repository at https://github.com/
Angus G. Forbes
                                           CreativeCodingLab/NeuroCave.
angus@ucsc.edu

Handling Editor:
Olaf Sporns
                                           INTRODUCTION

Copyright: © 2018
                                           Modern, noninvasive neuroimaging techniques provide a means with which to understand
Massachusetts Institute of Technology      structural and functional brain networks, or connectomes (Sporns, Tononi, & Kötter, 2005). Dif-
Published under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International              fusion MRI–derived white matter interconnectivity between different brain regions yields the
(CC BY 4.0) license                        structural connectome, and BOLD signal correlations generate the functional connectome.
                                           Mathematically, a connectome can be modeled as a graph by representing the different brain

              The MIT Press
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                 regions as nodes. Such models enable neuroscientists to apply network-theoretic methods
                                 and metrics, revealing important properties of the brain, such as small-worldness (Achard,
                                 Salvador, Whitcher, Suckling, & Bullmore, 2006; Salvador et al., 2005), clustering and modu-
                                 larity (Meunier, Lambiotte, & Bullmore, 2010), and rich-club conﬁguration (Van Den Heuvel
                                 & Sporns, 2011), and embeddedness (Ye, Zhan, et al., 2015) among others.

                                    We introduce NeuroCave, a visual analytics tool to investigate the connectome (Figure 1).
                                 Although NeuroCave facilitates a range of explorations, it was initially developed to support
                                 clinical neuroscience investigations, primarily related the following analysis tasks:

                                   T1 Identify regions responsible for speciﬁc cognitive functions and study their interactions
                                      with other regions.
                                   T2 Compare individual networks to the mean or group average connectome, or compare
                                      differences between two group average connectomes.

                                    NeuroCave enables researchers to load in different representations of a dataset in order
                                 to examine a speciﬁc region and to reason about its relationship to other brain regions. We




                                 Figure 1. The user interface of NeuroCave, presenting multiple views to investigate connectome
                                 data. A researcher can compare different datasets or the same dataset from different perspectives.
                                 Here, (A) shows a high-resolution functional connectome, and (B) shows the same connectome
                                 from a different orientation. When viewing multiple copies of the same dataset, actions can be
                                 synchronized so that interacting with one connectome updates the other. Users can choose an atlas
                                 to label brain regions. (C) shows the color/glyph atlas, and a user can toggle on or off speciﬁc
                                 brain regions or classiﬁcations by clicking next to items in the atlas. Here, the right parietal lobe
                                 has been turned off, making it easier for the researcher to interactively explore the speciﬁc areas of
                                 interest. In (D) a slider controls the opacity of all selected connectivities; in (E), users can turn edge
                                 bundling on or off for selected brain regions; and in (F), users can set the minimum or maximum
                                 threshold values and number of hops to determine which edges to display. Users can change the
                                 glyph size of individual nodes or selected brain regions in order to highlight relevant information.
                                 Here, the user has selected and enlarged a node (G) and is investigating edges emanating from the
                                 left parietal lobe above a threshold of 1.35518. NeuroCave is a web application that runs in both
                                 desktop and mobile environments, and users can switch seamlessly between the standard and VR
                                 modes on-demand. The inset image (bottom center) shows a neuroscientist (author ADL) exploring
                                 the 3D dataset in virtual reality using Oculus Rift VR with Touch controllers.



Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                  345
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                           explore an example of this in Use Case 1, in which NeuroCave is used to identify a strong
                                           functional coupling between the left and right hemispheres mediated by callosal connections
                                           during the resting state. In group studies, individual variations as well as joint network char-
                                           acteristics are studied in order to identify commonalities or differences between groups, in-
                                           cluding how these change over time. Use Case 2 explores neurological gender differences
                                           in connectome datasets and observes how these differences relate to various psychological
                                           studies.

                                              NeuroCave enables a wide range of interactive methods to support these tasks, including
                                           ﬂexible data loading and data transformations, enabling comparisons within and between con-
                                           nectome datasets; user deﬁned coloring scheme (based on lobar information, modular and/or
                                           community afﬁliation, etc.); a coordinate system that can be deﬁned interactively by users
                                           or automatically determined via a modular layout based on platonic solids; adjustable glyph
                                           size and transparency of nodes and edges; adjustable connectivity threshold for displaying
Edge bundling:                             edges; shortest path between two nodes; on-demand edge bundling and edge coloring; and
techniques that reduce visual clutter      on-demand labeling of nodes and edges. Details about these interactive functionalities are
in a network by grouping together          provided below (in the Methods section), and two use cases present examples of the range of
edges that follow similar trajectories
                                           insights that can be generated when using these techniques in NeuroCave to support tasks T1
between nodes or clusters of nodes.
                                           and T2 (in the Results section).


                                           Related Work

                                           Many tools exist to generate and visualize the connectome in 2D and 3D (Margulies, Böttger,
                                           Watanabe, & Gorgolewski, 2013). Three-dimensional visualization tools most often repre-
                                           sent the connectome as node-link diagrams, in which nodes are positioned relative to their
                                           corresponding anatomical locations, and links represent the connectivity between nodes. Ex-
                                           amples of such tools include the Connectome Visualization Utility (LaPlante, Douw, Tang, &
                                           Stufﬂebeam, 2014), BrainNet Viewer (Xia, Wang, & He, 2013), and the Connectome Viewer
                                           Toolkit (Gerhard et al., 2011). In general, node-link diagrams provide an effective overview
                                           of the entire graph, which makes it easy to observe relationships between both directly and
Visual clutter:                            indirectly connected nodes. However, excessive visual clutter is introduced as the number of
the state in which the representation      edge crossings increases, affecting the readability of the graph.
of data leads to a degeneration of
performance at some visual analysis            Representations of the connectome in 2D are also common. In certain cases, adjacency
task. For example, networks with           matrices can better manage large connectome datasets than node-link diagrams (Alper, Bach,
many edge crossing introduce visual
clutter because it becomes more
                                           Henry Riche, Isenberg, & Fekete, 2013; Ma et al., 2015). However, some visual analysis
difﬁcult to identify paths between         tasks are difﬁcult to perform using matrix representations (Ghoniem, Fekete, & Castagliola,
two nodes.                                 2005; Keller, Eckert, & Clarkson, 2006), such as detecting graph alterations in group studies.
                                           A popular 2D technique to highlight relevant brain connectivity patterns is the connectogram
                                           (Irimia et al., 2012). In a connectogram, the names of each brain region are presented along
                                           the perimeter of a circle, and the regions are positioned in two different halves according to
                                           the hemisphere they belong to. Furthermore, each hemisphere is broken down into differ-
                                           ent lobes, subcortical structures, and the cerebellum. The inner space of the circle is divided
                                           into multiple-colored nested rings, where each ring shows a heat map representing a spe-
Intrinsic geometry:                        ciﬁc metric. Interconnections between the regions are illustrated inside the circle by means
the very high dimensional nonlinear        of curved lines. As with NeuroCave, a goal of the connectogram is to more effectively repre-
geometric space natively induced
                                           sent densely connected networks, as is the case for the human connectome. Cacciola et al.
by the brain’s interconnectivity as
encoded by the connectome, either          (2017) demonstrate that the intrinsic geometry of a structural brain connectome relates to its
structural or functional, instead of the   brain anatomy, noting that the hyperbolic disk seems a congruous space of representation
neuroanatomical space.                     for structural connectomes, one in which it is possible to design brain latent-geometry-based


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                  346
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                 markers for differential connectomic analysis of healthy and diseased. Although connec-
                                 tograms help to prevent some of the clutter that occurs when visualizing networks containing
                                 a large number of edges, it can be challenging to correlate anatomical structures with connec-
                                 tivity, and users may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to make sense of connectograms with many layers of inner
                                 and outer circles (Burch & Weiskopf, 2014). Moreover, it can be time-consuming to produce a
                                 connectogram by using the popular Circos software (Krzywinski et al., 2009), which requires
                                 the preparation of nine distinct conﬁguration ﬁles. Finally, lacking a graphical user interface,
                                 it is generally used as a presentation tool rather than as a means to interact with connectome
                                 data. Although NeuroCave focuses on supporting the analysis tasks deﬁned above, it can be
                                 used to represent data in an analogous way. Figure 2 shows an example of similarly dense
                                 datasets represented in 2D using a connectogram and in 3D by using NeuroCave.

                                     Although most commonly used visualization tools are dedicated desktop applications, web-
                                 based implementations, such as Slice:Drop (Haehn, 2013) or BrainBrowser (Sherif, Kassis,
                                 Rousseau, Adalat, & Evans, 2015), free the user from being attached to a speciﬁc operating
                                 system (Pieloth, Pizarro, Knosche, Maess, & Fuchs, 2013). To this end, NeuroCave is a web-
                                 based application and runs in any modern browser, both on desktop and mobile computers.
                                 Rojas et al. (2014) ﬁnds that the use of stereoscopic techniques can provide a more immer-
                                 sive way to explore brain imaging data, and Hänel, Pieperhoff, Hentschel, Amunts, & Kuhlen
                                 (2014) show that healthcare professionals perceive the increased dimensionality provided by
                                 stereoscopy as beneﬁcial for understanding depth in the displayed scenery. Moreover, Ware
                                 & Mitchell (2008) ﬁnd that the use of stereographic visualizations reduces the error rate in
                                 graph perception for large graphs with more than 500 nodes. Alper, Hollerer, Kuchera-Morin,
                                 & Forbes (2011) observe that when coupled with a highlighting technique, stereoscopic rep-
                                 resentations of 3D graphs outperform their nonimmersive counterpart. NeuroCave harnesses
                                 the visualization capabilities of virtual reality (VR) environments, which can facilitate spa-
                                 tial manipulation, identiﬁcation, and classiﬁcation of objects and imagery, and aid users in
                                 understanding complex scenes (Bohil, Alicea, & Biocca, 2011; Forbes, Villegas, Almryde, &
                                 Plante, 2014; Marai, Forbes, & Johnson, 2016). Other tools that make use of VR for visualizing




                                 Figure 2. An example of a 2D connectogram (left), taken from the Circos tutorial website
                                 (http://circos.ca/tutorials/), versus a 3D platonic solid representation of a connectome and its mod-
                                 ularity using NeuroCave (right). With NeuroCave, users can interactively select particular nodes
                                 or groups of nodes to explore connectivity on-demand, and alternative layouts based on clustering
                                 parameters can be generated as required for a particular analysis task.



Network Neuroscience                                                                                                             347
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform


Table 1. A survey of neuroimaging connectomic software. This table categorizes each software in terms of whether or not it supports structural
or functional connectomes, or both, or if the software is accessed online via a browser. Additionally, we indicate whether or not the software
visualizes connectomes as a volume, a surface, or as a graph.




Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                     348
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                 connectomes include AlloBrain (Thompson et al., 2009), BrainX3 (Arsiwalla et al., 2015;
                                 Betella et al., 2014), and BRAINtrinsic (Conte et al., 2016; Conte, Ye, Forbes, Ajilore, & Leow,
                                 2015). Similar to BRAINtrinsic, NeuroCave emphasizes the ability to switch between anatom-
                                 ical representations and low-dimensional embeddings of connectome datasets. Although
                                 NeuroCave includes some of the virtual reality functionality available in these previous con-
                                 nectome visualization tools, it also enables users to move seamlessly between desktop and VR
                                 environments for interactively exploring 3D connectomes in a range of topological spaces,
                                 supports larger connectome datasets, includes novel layout strategies for presenting clusters
                                 of data in 3D space, and introduces a hardware-accelerated edge bundling technique for
                                 reducing link clutter.

                                    Table 1 provides an overview of popular tools used for visualizing connectome datasets.
                                 Although each of the visualization software tools listed in Table 1 may partially address the
                                 visualization tasks delineated in the introduction, none provides a visualization that can di-
                                 rectly facilitate tasks involving various types of comparison between datasets, since they all
                                 lack the ability to simultaneously load and synchronize a comparative visualization of multi-
                                 ple connectomes. Instead, the user needs to open multiple instances of the application, which
                                 usually requires the use of multiple monitors in order to visually compare the structural or
                                 functional connectomes of the same subject, or two subjects belonging to different groups.
                                 Clearly, with two instances of the software running, user actions will not be synchronized,
                                 making it more difﬁcult to assess visual differences. Some of the applications implemented
                                 in scripting languages, such as R and MATLAB, do provide the user with the ﬂexibility to
                                 customize views (e.g., to present multiple connectomes simultaneously). However, this re-
                                 quires additional efforts as well as programming expertise. By introducing a side-by-side layout,
                                 NeuroCave enables neuroscientists and researchers to efﬁciently execute tasks that involve
                                 comparative analyses, and to simultaneously spot changes occurring within and across sub-
                                 jects. NeuroCave does not target tractography-related usages, which, although an important
                                 area of connectomics visualization, are not usually a requirement for clinical neuroscientists
                                 (who are the intended audience for our visualization software).


                                 METHODS

                                 NeuroCave is implemented as a web-based application that makes use of three.js, a JavaScript
                                 graphics library for real-time rendering of 3D scenes. It runs on all major web browsers, and
                                 is thus platform independent. The default view is formed of two side-by-side rendering views
                                 (see Figure 1 and Figure 3). Each view enables the interactive visualization of a connectome
                                 as a node-link diagram.


                                 Group Visualization

                                 NeuroCave loads connectome data from a user-speciﬁed folder. This folder must contain all
                                 adjacency matrices as well as the corresponding topological and clustering information of
                                 the subjects within the study. An index ﬁle states the subject ID and its corresponding data
                                 ﬁles. Each study or analysis session requires a predeﬁned Atlas that provides numerical labels
                                 and their corresponding anatomical names to each node. NeuroCave currently supports three
                                 Atlases by default: FSL-based parcellation, which consists of 82 labels from FreeSurfer
                                 (Fischl, 2012); the Brain Hierarchical Atlas (BHA), comprised of 2,514 labels (Diez et al.,
                                 2015); and the Harvard-Oxford Atlas, which uses 177 labels (Makris et al., 1999). Additional
                                 Atlases can be created and existing ones can be customized easily, simply by using a preexist-
                                 ing Atlas as a template for deﬁning a new one. (See the online instruction manual available at


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                         349
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform




                                 Figure 3. Anatomical versus intrinsic geometry, as ﬁrst proposed by Ye et al. (2015). Here, we
                                 see a screen capture of NeuroCave showing a high-resolution 2514-ROI functional connectome in
                                 the anatomical space (left) and the intrinsic space (right), in which nodes that make up a module
                                 or “community,” as determined via Q-maximization, clearly form a cluster. Our tool facilitates the
                                 simultaneous exploration of multiple connectome datasets in a variety of conﬁgurations, enabling
                                 researchers to make meaningful comparisons between them and to reason about their differences.



                                 https://github.com/CreativeCodingLab/NeuroCave for more details of how to load in datasets
                                 and customize Atlases; Keiriz, Zhan, Ajilore, Leow, & Forbes, 2018a.)

                                    A common task in disease studies involves the comparison of two groups of subjects—for
                                 example, a healthy control group versus a disease group—in order to derive conclusions about
                                 alterations due to the disease. Currently, no existing connectome visualization application
                                 effectively facilitates real-time simultaneous comparison for two or more datasets. NeuroCave
                                 enables neuroscientists to visualize connectome datasets via a synchronized “side-by-side”
                                 layout, making it easier to explore differences between groups of subjects, or the same group
                                 represented using different spaces, modalities, or in different coordinate systems.


                                 Topology Visualization

                                 NeuroCave positions nodes according to the provided topological information. Available
                                 topologies include the anatomical positioning or any of number of applied transformations
                                 that reformulate this positioning into an abstract space. These topologies are automatically
                                 identiﬁed by the application, and ongoing development aims to enable the transformation of
                                 anatomical datasets into a range of topological spaces on-demand. Currently, we have applied
                                 a range of dimensionality reduction techniques to connectome datasets, including Isomap
                                 (Tenenbaum, De Silva, & Langford, 2000) and t-SNE (Maaten & Hinton, 2008), and we make
                                 use of these methods to help identify patterns in the “intrinsic geometry” (i.e., the geometry
                                 as determined by the brain connectivity itself, either structural or functional) of a connectome
                                 dataset (Cacciola et al., 2017; Ye, Ajilore, et al., 2015). Once these intrinsic datasets are loaded,
                                 users can switch between anatomical and these abstract topological spaces as needed to sup-
                                 port particular analyses, making it possible to see the same data transformed in various ways
                                 in order to investigate the connectome from a range of different perspectives. Figure 3 shows
                                 a comparison of the same connectome dataset in an anatomical versus a topological space.


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                             350
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform




                                 Figure 4. Modular representation on our platonic solid layout can be used to effectively visualize
                                 multilevel hierarchical clustering. In this example, each level is a bifurcation of the previous one:
                                 level 1 with two clusters (left), level 2 with four clusters (middle), and level 3 with eight clusters
                                 (right). Additionally, this ﬁgure illustrates how our force-directed edge bundlin (FDEB) algorithm can
                                 be used to simplify the visualization of edges; here a node corresponding to the left hippocampus
                                 is selected and all emerging edges connected to other brain regions are plotted.



                                 Clustering Visualization

                                 NeuroCave also supports the visualization of clusters of nodes (i.e., modular or community
                                 structure), either embedded within a topological space, or simply as groups of related points
                                 (where the spatial positioning of a cluster of nodes within the cluster has no meaning). Cluster-
                                 ing information is input as a vector of integer values, where each value represents a different
                                 module or cluster. When there is no meaningful spatial positioning provided for clusters (or
                                 when we choose to exclude this information), NeuroCave makes use of a layout technique
                                 that exploits the geometrical properties of platonic solids. In brief, a platonic solid is a regular,
                                 convex polyhedron constructed by congruent regular polygonal faces with the same num-
                                 ber of faces meeting at each vertex. Five platonic solids exist: tetrahedron, cube, octahedron,
                                 dodecahedron and icosahedron, with 4, 6, 8, 12, and 20 faces, respectively. Based on how
                                 many clusters are generated, assuming there are less than 20, a suitable platonic solid is chosen
                                 such that its number of faces is greater than the number of these clusters. The glyphs of each
                                 cluster are then equally distributed according to the sunﬂower algorithm (Vogel, 1979), cover-
                                 ing the corresponding face of a platonic solid embedded in a sphere. This enables the user to
                                 “enter” into the geometry (i.e., into the “NeuroCave”) via one of the unpopulated faces, pro-
                                 viding a more immersive experience of the data, especially when the VR mode is activated.
                                 Users can interactively rearrange the position of the clusters within the platonic solid in or-
                                 der to more easily see particular clusters, for example, those that are densely interconnected,
                                 or that are relevant for a particular analysis session. When applicable, clustering can be re-
                                 computed on-demand, with the user specifying the number of clusters, which in turn updates
                                 the platonic solid that is generated. Connections between individual nodes within clusters or
                                 between clusters can be visualized as well, as described below. Figure 4 shows an example
                                 of visualizing multilevel hierarchical clustering using our platonic solids approach. Finding
                                 appropriate visualizations that are useful for desktop and VR environments (or both) is an on-
                                 going topic in visualization (Liluashvili et al., 2016; Tang, Liu, Zhang, & Mei, 2016). Our
                                 above approach is of course just one of the many ways that connectome datasets could be
                                 visualized in 3D, and we plan to introduce additional layouts in the future.


                                 Node and Edge Visualization

                                 By default, we utilize two different glyphs (spheres and cubes) to differentiate between left and
                                 right hemisphere afﬁliation. Nodes can be colored according to lobar or modular information.


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                              351
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                 Controlling nodal transparency is also possible according to their color scheme and colors can
                                 be interactively assigned to different amounts of transparency modes as desired. For example,
                                 a brain region that has been assigned a particular color can be toggled on or off (made visible or
                                 invisible), or the transparency of one or more regions or clusters can be increased or decreased
                                 in order to emphasize or de-emphasize them (see Figure 1). The glyph size of individual nodes
                                 or groups of nodes is also interactively adjustable by the user via our interface, both in desktop
                                 mode or in VR mode. Text labels identifying the nodes can be displayed for all nodes or for
                                 user-selected nodes as desired.

                                    NeuroCave includes a range of features to visualize edges efﬁciently and effectively. Net-
                                 work visualizations that have an excessive amount of overlapping edges, common in dense
                                 node-link diagrams, can introduce unwanted visual clutter, which makes it more difﬁcult to
                                 read and interpret the network. We implement two ways to mitigate this problem. First, we
                                 provide the option to hide all edges by default (i.e., to show only the nodes), and then enable
                                 a user to interactively add edges as desired. In this mode, a user can select any node as a
                                 “root” node, causing all connected edges stemming from this node to be displayed. Second,
                                 to minimize the clutter occurring from edge crossings, we use the force-directed edge bundling
                                 (FDEB) algorithm to group edges going in the same direction (Holten & Van Wijk, 2009).

                                     Standard implementations of edge bundling are too slow for the large numbers of edges that
                                 can appear in some connectome datasets visualized in NeuroCave, reducing the frame rate
                                 of the application and preventing an effective real-time experience. Therefore, we introduce
                                 an enhanced WebGL texture-based implementation, extending previous work by Wu, Yu, &
                                 Yu (2015). In our approach, we can increase the maximum number of edges between nodes
                                 through the use of multiple GPU textures. Our texture-based implementation can bundle the
                                 closest 1,000 edges to the selected node at interactive rates on a desktop computer (see Imple-
                                 mentation Details below). Although this is sufﬁcient for the datasets we explored, we also en-
                                 able users to choose threshold values that limit only connections above or below speciﬁed
                                 strengths to be computed, both to improve performance in situations where the data contains
                                 very dense interconnections, and to assist in analyses focused on particular connectivity
                                 weights.

                                     Each edge can be colored using a gradient, whose two colors are chosen according to the
                                 colors of the source and target nodes that it connects, and where the gradient is skewed toward
                                 the node possessing the higher nodal strength. This enables the user to quickly recognize the
                                 strength of the selected node with respect to its interconnected neighbors, which can help in
                                 identifying important nodes or clusters of nodes, as well as to highlight the reason for modular
                                 changes when they occur in group studies. Figure 5 and Figure 7 show examples of this edge
                                 coloring approach. (Further details about the layout algorithm, the edge bundling algorithm,
                                 and the gradient coloring can be found in the supplementary material available at the project
                                 website; Keiriz, Zhan, Ajilore, Leow, & Forbes, 2018a.)

                                 Virtual Reality

                                 NeuroCave can be viewed on a normal desktop or mobile environment, or via a VR sys-
                                 tem. Currently we support the Oculus Rift and the Samsung Gear VR platforms, with explicit
                                 support for additional platforms planned in the near future. In addition to the standard 3D
                                 manipulations of panning, rotating, and zooming, NeuroCave supports the advanced interac-
                                 tion features available on the Oculus Rift via the use of Oculus Rift Touch controllers. The
                                 Touch controllers are a pair of VR input devices that track each hand, enabling an effective
                                 gesture-based manipulation of the VR environment. The user selects the preview area to be


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                          352
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform




                                 Figure 5. Connectivity emerging from the anterior (red ring) and posterior (yellow ring) parts of the
                                 precuneus in anatomical space (left panel) and an “intrinsic” space generated using Isomap (middle
                                 panel). Right panel: Connectivity emerging from the posterior part of the precuneus visualized in
                                 the intrinsic space. The color code represents the modular structure of the connectome consisting of
                                 four modules. Note that the orange community contains the default mode network. The bottom-left
                                 inset shows another view of the left panel with all nodes enlarged in order to better see the modular
                                 structure. The top-center inset plot shows the residual geodesics for the ﬁrst 10 dimensions of the
                                 Isomap dimensionality reduction algorithm.



                                 explored in VR and then uses the “thumbsticks” on the Touch devices to navigate the visual-
                                 ized connectome. Nodal selection is enabled via a two-step procedure: ﬁrst, pressing the grip
                                 button lets the user point at and highlight a node; second, pressing the index button selects
                                 the highlighted node. We can mimic some of this functionality in other VR platforms (e.g., any
                                 platform that supports WebVR, such as Google Cardboard or Daydream), but node selection
                                 is not as effortless if the controllers do not contain tracking sensors. Users can enter and leave
                                 VR mode as often as they like in order to support investigations of connectome datasets.

                                    From our initial qualitative observations, we ﬁnd that users are very engaged in exploring
                                 the data while in VR mode, and enjoy switching between the different available layouts based
                                 on the different clustering and dimensionality reduction techniques. Users also indicate that
                                 they appreciate the ability to bring up different datasets on-demand while immersed in the VR
                                 mode, especially to see if patterns discovered in one connectome (e.g., a connectome dataset
                                 representing average healthy subjects) were present in another (e.g., a connectome dataset
                                 representing average diseased subjects). Users also readily move between the desktop display
                                 and the VR display without complaint. In practice, users tend to use the VR environments to
                                 make initial explorations of the data and to generate hypotheses about the connectomes, and
                                 then switch to a desktop view once more nuanced investigations are required. However, we
                                 believe this is partly due to users not being as familiar with navigating in VR (and especially
                                 with making ﬁne-grained selections with the VR controllers), and also because of the need to
                                 use additional applications during an analysis (i.e., for web search, taking notes, etc.) that are
                                 not readily available when wearing a portable VR headset.

                                 RESULTS
                                 NeuroCave has been tested in a wide range of contexts using a variety of datasets. Through
                                 using the various features in combination in order to interact with connectome datasets, Neuro-
                                 Cave supports a range of analysis tasks, including identifying relevant brain regions, comparing
                                 variations between individual and average connectomes, investigating relationships between
                                 structural and functional connectomes, and analyzing group changes in connectomes, among
                                 others. The rich set of visualization features provided by NeuroCave makes it possible for


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                             353
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                          users to explore connectome datasets in a ﬂexible manner, to make observations about con-
                                          nectome data, to generate hypotheses about these observations, and then to dive in more
                                          deeply to support or invalidate hypotheses. Here, we brieﬂy describe two use cases in which
                                          neuroscientists use NeuroCave to analyze connectome datasets. Although these use cases
                                          show only preliminary research results, they provide evidence indicating that NeuroCave
                                          facilitates useful explorations of complex datasets. That is, NeuroCave supports the process of
                                          generating and querying visual representations in order to answer task-speciﬁc questions, or
Sensemaking:                              what Russell, Steﬁk, Pirolli, and Card (1993) have described as “sensemaking.”
the process of building a mental
model by exploring and organizing
                                          Use Case 1
data, facilitating decision making
and problem solving.                      Our ﬁrst use case explores a resting-state fMRI high-resolution dataset (Keiriz, Zhan, Ajilore,
                                          Leow, & Forbes, 2018b) consisting of 2,514 regions-of-interest publicly available at NITRC
                                          (http://www.nitrc.org/frs/?group_id=964) and demonstrates the feasibility of visualizing the
                                          intrinsic geometry of the resting state. Extending the PACE procedure introduced by Zhan
                                          et al. (2017) for an N × N functional connectome, this intrinsic geometry is reconstructed by
                                          ﬁrst estimating the probability that an edge eij is positive (nodes i and j are co-activating) or
                                          negative (nodes i and j are anti-activating) using a group of subjects. The resulting probabil-
                                          ities, the edge positivity positivity EPij and edge negativity ENij form a complementary pair,
                                          since EPij + ENij = 1, and thus can be jointly coded using the angle of a unit-length vector:
                                          θij = arctan( ENij /EPij ) that varies from 0 to 90 degrees. Using dissimilarity graph em-
                                          bedding (Xing et al., 2016), each node, i, is then embedded in a 2,514-dimensional space at
                                          the coordinates (θi1 , θi2 , ...θi2514 ) T . Here, we picked the classic Isomap algorithm because of
                                          its quasi-isometry property (Tenenbaum et al., 2000) that aims to preserve geodesic distances
                                          in a lower dimensional space (i.e., the “intrinsic space”), but other type of low-dimension
                                          embedding approaches can be used. Separately, we determined the community structure by
Q-modularity:                             maximizing the Q-modularity metric, yielding four communities in this case (Newman, 2006).
a scalar metric that measures a
network’s community or modular                From the inset plot in Figure 5, it is clear that the Isomap-derived intrinsic geometry of the
structure. It is computed as the          resting-state functional connectome is achieved with four dimensions, a novel ﬁnding that
fraction of edges that fall within the    merits further research. To enable 3D visualization of the transformed topology, we retained
given modules minus the expected          the ﬁrst three dimensions of Isomap and visualized the modular structure of the brain in both
fraction if edges were randomly
                                          the anatomical space as well as this intrinsic space. As the community afﬁliation is separately
distributed. Dense nodal connections
within the same modules and sparse        determined using Q-maximization, it is thus validating to see that the nodes assigned to the
connections between nodes in              same community according to Q are positioned close to one another in the intrinsic space. To
different modules are found in            illustrate how neuroscientists explore this complex topological space and gain further insight
networks with high modularity.            into the brain, we selected two nodes that belong to the anterior and posterior part of the
                                          precuneus. Although the nodes are anatomically close to each other, they are known to be
                                          functionally distinct (and thus belong to different modules). Indeed, the anterior part of the
Default mode network, or DMN:             precuneus is an important region of the default mode network known to be responsible for
a network that comprises different        self-referential imagery (thinking about self) and is involved in autobiographical tasks and self-
brain regions jointly active during the   consciousness, thus activated during “resting consciousness” (Cavanna, 2007). As Figure 5
resting state.
                                          illustrates, in this intrinsic space the anterior part of the precuneus, while assigned to the orange
                                          module that contains the default mode network, also exhibits diverse connections with various
                                          regions of the brain: the blue cluster that contains the sensorimotor module and the red module
                                          that contains the frontoparietal executive or task-positive system. By contrast, the posterior
                                          precuneus is part of the visual system (green) and has a relatively restricted pattern (compared
                                          with its more anterior counterpart) of connectivity with the rest of the brain. Notably, such
                                          connectivity differences only become visually apparent when visualized in this novel space.
                                          The intrinsic geometry of the mean structural connectome from the same dataset reveals a


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                      354
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform




                                       Figure 6. This ﬁgure shows an exploration of the structural connectome in intrinsic (left) and
                                       anatomical (right) geometry for the same connectome dataset gathered from the same participants
                                       as the functional connectome shown in Figure 5.


                                       completely different topology, shown in Figure 6, left. Here, note that visually there exists
                                       a strong left-right symmetry, which is not present in the case of functional connectome. Put
                                       together, these two intrinsic geometries suggest strong functional coupling between the left
                                       and right hemispheres, likely mediated by the callosal connections, during the resting state.
                                       This ﬁnding is consistent with recent results reported by Cacciola et al. (2017), who indicate a
                                       clear matching between intrinsic geometry and neuroanatomy.

                                          This use case highlights our visualization system successfully supporting task T1, enabling
                                       neuroscientists to explore high-density connectomics data comprising a large number of re-
                                       gions of interest (ROIs) in order to identify and further understand the speciﬁc functionality of
                                       different brain regions. Moreover, the side-by-side visualization enables users to reason about
                                       the relationships between the anatomical and the intrinsic topology, facilitating further insight
                                       into how the same brain region can take part in different tasks.

                                       Use Case 2

                                       Our second use case investigates the sex-speciﬁc resting-state functional connectomes in the
                                       F1000 repository, a large 986 subject publicly available resting-state fMRI connectome dataset
                                       available at https://www.nitrc.org/projects/fcon_1000/. Recognizing that negative edges be-
                                       tween nodes in connectome datasets may be neurobiologically relevant (Sporns & Betzel,
                                       2016), Zhan et al. (2017) introduce an approach that utilizes negative signal correlations be-
                                       tween two nodes. The following postprocessing steps were performed on the F1000 dataset: (a)
                                       First, to eliminate the potential confounding effect of age, we only included subjects between
                                       20 to 30 years old (319 women at 23.25 ± 2.26 years of age and 233 men at 23.19 ± 2.35); and
Probability-associated community       (b) using PACE (probability-associated community estimation), we constructed a hierarchical
estimation, or PACE:                   modularity of the resting-state functional connectome followed by a rigorous permutation test-
a noncorrelation-based                 ing procedure that established novel sex differences, statistically signiﬁcant across all levels of
computational connectomics
                                       modular hierarchy, starting at the ﬁrst level ( p = 0.0378), for the following regions, as indicated
approach to the modularity of the
functional connectome, in which        in Figure 7: left precentral gyrus (A), bilateral most posterior segment of the frontal pole near
co- versus antiactivations naturally   the frontotemporal junction (B and C), right inferior frontal gyrus pars opercularis (D), and right
occur between brain regions.           hippocampus (E). These observations, which were initially noted in explorations using Neuro-
                                       Cave, were then further analyzed using other statistical tools, as discussed in Zhan et al. (2017).


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                  355
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform




                                 Figure 7. This ﬁgure shows two annotated screen captures taken during a visual analysis session
                                 using NeuroCave in which a researcher interactively explores sex-speciﬁc resting-state functional
                                 connectomes in the F1000 repository, exploring differences between average female (left) and male
                                 (right) connectomes. Here, the color code represents the hierarchical modularity of the connectome,
                                 represented as a dendrogram at the most global level (2 modules). All edges are turned on and nodes
                                 that exhibited switching in modularity are selected (indicated with the larger marker size). Node
                                 A is from the left precentral gyrus, B and C are nodes from the bilateral most posterior segment
                                 of the frontal pole near the fronto-temporal junction, D is from the right inferior frontal gyrus pars
                                 opercularis, and E is from the right hippocampus. Contrasting the top image with the bottom image
                                 (where edges were thresholded at a higher value of 0.33), sex-speciﬁc patterns reveal themselves,
                                 showing a tightly interconnected cluster in A–D, whereas E exhibits an opposite switching pattern.



                                    NeuroCave enables us to visually interpret these sex differences as follows. First, we exam-
                                 ine the connectivity patterns of the aforementioned regions in the anatomical (ﬁrst hierarchical
                                 level) space by selecting them in NeuroCave (Figure 7, top) and using the threshold sliders
                                 available in NeuroCave to restrict edges to values with absolute correlation values for fMRI
                                 BOLD signals larger than 0.33 (Figure 7, bottom). In the bottom image of Figure 7, it is clear
                                 that A–D forms a tightly interconnected cluster, whereas E (the right hippocampus) exhibits an
                                 opposite switching pattern. In fact, afﬁliation patterns for the right hippocampus differ between
                                 sexes. In women they are clustered with other regions that collectively form the default mode
                                 network, or DMN, the orange module, whereas in males they are clustered with other parietal
                                 and occipital non-DMN ROIs. Notably, the afﬁliation differences are in the opposite direction
                                 for the left and right frontal poles, the left precentral gyrus, and the right pars opercularis, such
                                 that they are assigned the blue module (i.e., non-DMN) in the average female connectome.


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                              356
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                     The left and right frontotemporal junctions form the larger language system, with the right
                                 pars opercularis (functionally coupled with its homologous area on the left that forms the
                                 Broca’s language area) linked to the processing of semantic information (Heim et al., 2005),
                                 and the superior temporal gyrus involved in the comprehension of language, as well as in the
                                 perception of emotions in facial stimuli (Bigler et al., 2007). Thus, the observed connectivity
                                 differences are likely related to well-known sex differences in language and emotion/affect
                                 processing, as well as differences in self-referential/autobiographical information retrieval. By
                                 contrast, the hippocampus is known to play an important role in the formation of new memory,
                                 retrieval of declarative long-term memory, and the management and processing of spatial and
                                 spatiotemporal working memory. The modular afﬁnity between the right hippocampus and
                                 other non-DMN regions in the parietal and occipital lobes in men may thus be related to
                                 their postulated advantage in visuospatial tasks, including spatial visualization, perception,
                                 and mental rotation (Linn & Petersen, 1985). (The visual system is heavily composed of the
                                 occipital lobe, which is responsible for ﬁrst-level visual processing, although part of the parietal
                                 lobe is instrumental for visuospatial skills.)

                                    Additionally, examining the same dataset in NeuroCave, we ﬁnd a clear visually indication
                                 that the right hippocampus exhibits a stronger contralateral connectivity with the left frontal
                                 cortex in women than in men. Interestingly, in ovariectomized female rates there is a decrease
                                 in dendritic spine in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and hippocampus (Wallace, Luine, Arellanos,
                                 & Frankfurt, 2006), whereas in human studies estrogen has been shown to activate the same
                                 regions (Berman et al., 1997; Maki, 2005; Maki & Resnick, 2000; Stevens, Clark, & Prestwood,
                                 2005) and estrogen infusion in a group of post-menopausal women increased the connectivity
                                 between the two (Ottowitz et al., 2008).

                                    The discovery of such subtle differences is dependent on an iteratively explorative visual-
                                 ization process, only possible with the comprehensive suite of tools, such as those we have
                                 implemented in NeuroCave. Indeed, NeuroCave provided researchers with the ability to visu-
                                 ally explore the sex-speciﬁc resting-state functional connectomes, leading to initial hypotheses,
                                 some of which have been analyzed much more thoroughly in Zhan et al. (2017). This use case
                                 demonstrates the effectiveness of NeuroCave in supporting task T2, enabling neuroscientists to
                                 better understand neurological differences between connectome datasets and to observe how
                                 these differences relate to various psychological studies.


                                 DISCUSSION
                                 As demonstrated by these two use cases, NeuroCave enables brain researchers to conduct
                                 sophisticated explorations of large datasets interactively. It provides users with the ability to
                                 navigate connectomes in a ﬂexible manner, using the available interactive techniques to switch
                                 between different views, to change clustering metrics and layouts, to highlight meaningful
                                 connections and to ﬁlter out edges or nodes not relevant to a speciﬁc inquiry, to see data in
                                 different topological spaces, and to move seamlessly in and out of VR mode. In both use
                                 cases described above, researchers made use of each of these techniques in order to home in
                                 on interesting features of the connectome data, and to then validate initial hypotheses about
                                 these features.

                                 Implementation Details

                                 Within NeuroCave, node selection and the edge display are synchronized between the two
                                 side-by-side views: selecting a node in one view activates the node and displays its corre-
                                 sponding edges across both viewing areas, independent of the chosen conﬁguration for each


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                            357
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                 side. In order to make real-time manipulation of large datasets possible, we use hardware-
                                 accelerated graphics and extend a texture-based implementation of the FDEB algorithm (Wu
                                 et al., 2015). Our implementation harnesses the computational power of the graphical pro-
                                 cessing unit (GPU) in order to perform the required computations, and is at least 50 times faster
                                 than its CPU counterpart, enabling real-time edge bundling of over 1,000 edges at interactive
                                 rates (tested on a desktop computer with the following hardware: Intel Core i7, 3.4 GHz CPU,
                                 a Nvidia GTX 1070 GPU card, and 32GB RAM). The other features presented in NeuroCave
                                 do not require a dedicated GPU, and the real-time edge bundling does not need to be active
                                 to use the software. However, systems with a dedicated GPU are able to render much larger
                                 networks without any noticeable lag between frames. The datasets investigated in Use Case 1,
                                 where each panel displays 2,514 nodes, are the largest that we have so far tested, and our
                                 system successfully facilitates pair-wise comparisons between two groups or the same group
                                 presented in different topological spaces. Although only two panels are displayed simulta-
                                 neously, a user can swap out the dataset for each panel on-demand. The ability to do this is
                                 limited only by the memory available to the browser. In practice, we have loaded over a dozen
                                 datasets into NeuroCave at the same time, with no loss in performance.



                                 Conclusion

                                 In this paper we presented NeuroCave, a web-based, VR-compatible visualization system that
                                 enables researchers to explore the human connectome in a range of immersive, interactive
                                 environments, as well as within traditional desktop or mobile environments. NeuroCave sup-
                                 ports the comparison of two datasets in a side-by-side layout in order to facilitate the discov-
                                 ery of connectivity (or disconnectivity) patterns in group studies. Our software makes use of
                                 the GPU to greatly improve the rendering speed of large connectome datasets and to enable
                                 real-time user interactions. As shown in the two illustrative cases, we believe that Neuro-
                                 Cave is a valuable tool for a wide range of structural and functional connectome analyses.
                                 Future work will give users the option to make use of popular community detection algo-
                                 rithms, such as Louvain (Blondel, Guillaume, Lambiotte, & Lefebvre, 2011) and Infomap
                                 (Rosvall & Bergstrom, 2008), which were found to perform well across a range of benchmarks
                                 (Lancichinetti & Fortunato, 2009). We also will adapt our system to support temporally varying
                                 dynamic datasets (Crossley et al., 2016; Forbes et al., 2018; Ma, Forbes, Llano, Berger-Wolf,
                                 & Kenyon, 2016; Purgato, Santambrogio, Berger-Wolf, & Forbes, 2017), and investigate how
                                 NeuroCave can facilitate comparisons between structural and functional connectomes in or-
                                 der to reveal the complex mappings between them (Bullmore & Sporns, 2009; C. Honey et al.,
                                 2009; C. J. Honey, Kötter, Breakspear, & Sporns, 2007). Another future goal is to quantitatively
                                 assess the impact of VR mode on analysis tasks and empirically investigate the current Neuro-
                                 Cave workﬂow, which encourages moving between VR and desktop modes. Additionally, we
                                 will investigate the use of collaborative VR environments in which multiple users can interact
                                 with the same datasets simultaneously (Marrinan et al., 2016, 2017).



                                 SUPPORTING INFORMATION

                                 The NeuroCave application and open source code, along with detailed instructions and
                                 examples, are freely available for use and for download at our GitHub repository: https://github.
                                 com/CreativeCodingLab/NeuroCave. All ﬁgures in this article were made using NeuroCave,
                                 and the datasets supporting the use cases can be explored via the online version of NeuroCave
                                 at https://creativecodinglab.github.io/NeuroCave/.


Network Neuroscience                                                                                                         358
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



                                              AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
                                              Johnson Keiriz: Software; Visualization; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.
                                              Liang Zhan: Data curation; Validation. Olusola Ajilore: Conceptualization; Investigation;
                                              Methodology; Project administration; Resources; Supervision; Validation; Writing – review &
                                              editing. Alex Leow: Conceptualization; Formal analysis; Funding acquisition; Investigation;
                                              Methodology; Project administration; Resources; Supervision; Validation; Writing –
                                              original draft; Writing – review & editing. Angus G. Forbes: Conceptualization; Investigation;
                                              Methodology; Project administration; Resources; Software; Supervision; Validation; Visualiza-
                                              tion; Writing – original draft; Writing – review & editing.

                                              FUNDING INFORMATION
                                              Alex Leow, National Institutes of Health (http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002), Award ID:
                                              R21AG056782.


REFERENCES

Achard, S., Salvador, R., Whitcher, B., Suckling, J., & Bullmore,            Bullmore, E., & Sporns, O. (2009). Complex brain networks: Graph
  E. (2006). A resilient, low-frequency, small-world human brain                theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. Nature
  functional network with highly connected association cortical                 Reviews Neuroscience, 10(3), 186–198.
  hubs. Journal of Neuroscience, 26(1), 63–72.                               Burch, M., & Weiskopf, D. (2014). On the beneﬁts and drawbacks
Alper, B., Bach, B., Henry Riche, N., Isenberg, T., & Fekete, J.-D.             of radial diagrams. In W. Huang (Ed.), Handbook of human-
  (2013). Weighted graph comparison techniques for brain con-                   centric visualization (pp. 429–451). New York: Springer.
  nectivity analysis. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGCHI confer-              Cacciola, A., Muscoloni, A., Narula, V., Calamuneri, A., Nigro, S.,
  ence on human factors in computing systems (pp. 483–492).                     Mayer, E. A., . . . Cannistraci, C. V. (2017). Coalescent embed-
Alper, B., Hollerer, T., Kuchera-Morin, J., & Forbes, A. G. (2011).             ding in the hyperbolic space unsupervisedly discloses the hidden
  Stereoscopic highlighting: 2D graph visualization on stereo                   geometry of the brain. arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.04192. https://
  displays. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer                     arxiv.org/pdf/1705.04192.pdf
  Graphics, 17(12), 2325–2333.                                               Cavanna, A. E. (2007). The precuneus and consciousness. CNS
Arsiwalla, X. D., Zucca, R., Betella, A., Martinez, E., Dalmazzo, D.,           Spectrums, 12(07), 545–552.
  Omedas, P., . . . Verschure, P. F. (2015). Network dynamics with           Conte, G., Ye, A., Almryde, K., Ajilore, O., Leow, A., & Forbes,
  BrainX3: A large-scale simulation of the human brain network                  A. G. (2016). Intrinsic geometry visualization for the inter-
  with real-time interaction. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 9, 02.             active analysis of brain connectivity patterns. In: Proceedings of
Berman, K. F., Schmidt, P. J., Rubinow, D. R., Danaceau, M. A.,                 electronic imaging, visualization and data analysis (pp. 481-1–8).
  Van Horn, J. D., Esposito, G., . . . Weinberger, D. R. (1997). Mod-           Springﬁeld, VA: Society for Imaging Science and Technology.
  ulation of cognition-speciﬁc cortical activity by gonadal steroids:        Conte, G., Ye, A. Q., Forbes, A. G., Ajilore, O., & Leow, A. (2015).
  A positron-emission tomography study in women. Proceedings                    BRAINtrinsic: A virtual reality-compatible tool for exploring in-
  of the National Academy of Sciences, 94(16), 8836–8841.                       trinsic topologies of the human brain connectome. In Y. Guo,
Betella, A., Cetnarski, R., Zucca, R., Arsiwalla, X. D., Martinez, E.,          K. Friston, F. Aldo, S. Hill, & H. Peng (Eds.), Brain informatics
  Omedas, P., . . . Verschure, P. F. (2014). BrainX3: Embodied ex-              and health (pp. 67–76). Springer.
  ploration of neural data. In: Proceedings of the 2014 virtual re-          Crossley, N. A., Marques, T. R., Taylor, H., Chaddock, C.,
  ality international conference (p. 37).                                       Dell’Acqua, F., Reinders, A. A., . . . Kapur, S. (2016). Connec-
Bigler, E. D., Mortensen, S., Neeley, E. S., Ozonoff, S., Krasny, L.,           tomic correlates of response to treatment in ﬁrst-episode psy-
  Johnson, M., . . . Lainhart, J. E. (2007). Superior temporal gyrus, lan-      chosis. Brain, 140(2), 487–496.
  guage function, and autism. Developmental Neuropsychology,                 Diez, I., Bonifazi, P., Escudero, I. N., Mateos, B., Muñoz, M. A.,
  31(2), 217–238.                                                               Stramaglia, S., & Cortes, J. M. (2015). A novel brain partition
Blondel, V. D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., & Lefebvre, É.                 highlights the modular skeleton shared by structure and function.
  (2011). The louvain method for community detection in large net-              Scientiﬁc Reports, 5, 10532.
  works. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment,            Fischl, B. (2012). Freesurfer. NeuroImage, 62(2), 774–781.
  10, P10008.                                                                Forbes, A. G., Burks, A., Lee, K., Li, X., Boutillier, P., Krivine, J.,
Bohil, C. J., Alicea, B., & Biocca, F. A. (2011). Virtual reality in neu-       & Fontana, W. (2018). Dynamic inﬂuence networks for rule-
  roscience research and therapy. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,                  based models. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
  12(12), 752–762.                                                              Graphics, 24(1), 184–194.




Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                           359
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



Forbes, A. G., Villegas, J., Almryde, K. R., & Plante, E. (2014). A          3D visualization of complex biomolecular interaction networks.
   stereoscopic system for viewing the temporal evolution of brain           bioRxiv, 061374.
   activity clusters in response to linguistic stimuli. In: Proceedings   Linn, M. C., & Petersen, A. C. (1985). Emergence and characteri-
   of SPIE: Vol. 9011. (p. 90110I).                                          zation of sex differences in spatial ability: A meta-analysis. Child
Gerhard, S., Daducci, A., Lemkaddem, A., Meuli, R., Thiran, J.-P.,           Development, 56, 1479–1498.
   & Hagmann, P. (2011). The Connectome Viewer Toolkit: An                Ma, C., Forbes, A. G., Llano, D. A., Berger-Wolf, T., & Kenyon, R. V.
   open source framework to manage, analyze, and visualize con-              (2016). SwordPlots: Exploring neuron behavior within dynamic
   nectomes. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 5, 3.                            communities of brain networks. Journal of Imaging Science and
Ghoniem, M., Fekete, J.-D., & Castagliola, P. (2005). On the                 Technology, 60(1), 10405-1–13.
   readability of graphs using node-link and matrix-based rep-            Ma, C., Kenyon, R. V., Forbes, A. G., Berger-Wolf, T., Slater, B. J.,
   resentations: A controlled experiment and statistical analysis.           & Llano, D. A. (2015). Visualizing dynamic brain networks using
   Information Visualization, 4(2), 114–135.                                 an animated dual-representation. In: Proceedings of the euro-
Haehn, D. (2013). Slice:Drop: Collaborative medical imaging in the           graphics conference on visualization (EuroVis) (pp. 73–77).
   browser. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2013 computer animation festival.             Maaten, L. V. D., & Hinton, G. (2008). Visualizing data using t-SNE.
Hänel, C., Pieperhoff, P., Hentschel, B., Amunts, K., & Kuhlen,              Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9, 2579–2605.
   T. (2014). Interactive 3D visualization of structural changes in       Maki, P. M. (2005). Estrogen effects on the hippocampus and frontal
   the brain of a person with corticobasal syndrome. Frontiers in            lobes. International Journal of Fertility and Women’s Medicine,
   Neuroinformatics, 8, 42.                                                  50(2), 67–71.
Heim, S., Alter, K., Ischebeck, A. K., Amunts, K., Eickhoff, S. B.,       Maki, P. M., & Resnick, S. M. (2000). Longitudinal effects of estro-
   Mohlberg, H., . . . Friederici, A. D. (2005). The role of the left        gen replacement therapy on pet cerebral blood ﬂow and cogni-
   Brodmann’s areas 44 and 45 in reading words and pseudowords.              tion. Neurobiology of Aging, 21(2), 373–383.
   Cognitive Brain Research, 25(3), 982–993.                              Makris, N., Meyer, J. W., Bates, J. F., Yeterian, E. H., Kennedy, D. N.,
Holten, D., & Van Wijk, J. J. (2009). Force-directed edge bundling           & Caviness, V. S. (1999). MRI-based topographic parcellation of
   for graph visualization. In: Proceedings of the eurographics              human cerebral white matter and nuclei: II. Rationale and appli-
   conference on visualization (EuroVis) (pp. 983–998).                      cations with systematics of cerebral connectivity. NeuroImage,
Honey, C., Sporns, O., Cammoun, L., Gigandet, X., Thiran, J.-P.,             9(1), 18–45.
   Meuli, R., & Hagmann, P. (2009). Predicting human resting-state        Marai, G. E., Forbes, A. G., & Johnson, A. (2016). Interdisciplinary
   functional connectivity from structural connectivity. Proceedings         immersive analytics at the Electronic Visualization Laboratory:
   of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(6), 2035–2040.                   Lessons learned and upcoming challenges. In: IEEE VR workshop
Honey, C. J., Kötter, R., Breakspear, M., & Sporns, O. (2007). Net-          on immersive analytics (pp. 54–59).
   work structure of cerebral cortex shapes functional connectivity       Margulies, D. S., Böttger, J., Watanabe, A., & Gorgolewski, K. J. (2013).
   on multiple time scales. Proceedings of the National Academy of           Visualizing the human connectome. NeuroImage, 80, 445–461.
   Sciences, 104(24), 10240–10245.                                        Marrinan, T., Renambot, L., Leigh, J., Forbes, A. G., Jones,
Irimia, A., Chambers, M. C., Torgerson, C. M., Filippou, M., Hovda,          S., & Johnson, A. (2016). Synchronized mixed presence data-
   D. A., Alger, J. R., . . . others (2012). Patient-tailored connec-        conferencing using large-scale shared displays. In: Proceedings
   tomics visualization for the assessment of white matter atrophy           of the 11th ACM international conference on interactive surfaces
   in traumatic brain injury. Frontiers in Neurology, 3, 10.                 and spaces (ISS) (pp. 355–360). Niagara Falls, Canada.
Keiriz, J. J. G., Zhan, L., Ajilore, O., Leow, A. D., & Forbes, A. G.     Marrinan, T., Renambot, L., Leigh, J., Forbes, A. G., Jones, S., &
   (2018a). CreativeCoding Lab. https://github.com/CreativeCoding            Johnson, A. (2017). Mixed presence collaboration using scalable
   Lab/NeuroCave                                                             visualizations in heterogeneous display spaces. In: Proceedings of
Keiriz, J. J. G., Zhan, L., Ajilore, O., Leow, A. D., & Forbes, A. G.        the 20th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
   (2018b). Datasets. https://creativecodinglab.github.io/NeuroCave/         Work & Social Computing (CSCW) (pp. 2236–2245). Portland,
Keller, R., Eckert, C. M., & Clarkson, P. J. (2006). Matrices or node-       Oregon.
   link diagrams: Which visual representation is better for visualis-     Meunier, D., Lambiotte, R., & Bullmore, E. T. (2010). Modular and
   ing connectivity models? Information Visualization, 5(1), 62–76.          hierarchically modular organization of brain networks. Frontiers
Krzywinski, M., Schein, J., Birol, I., Connors, J., Gascoyne, R.,            in Neuroscience, 4, 200.
   Horsman, D., . . . Marra, M. A. (2009). Circos: An information         Newman, M. E. (2006). Modularity and community structure in
   aesthetic for comparative genomics. Genome Research, 19(9),               networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
   1639–1645.                                                                103(23), 8577–8582.
Lancichinetti, A., & Fortunato, S. (2009). Community detection algo-      Ottowitz, W. E., Siedlecki, K. L., Lindquist, M. A., Dougherty, D. D.,
   rithms: A comparative analysis. Physical Review E, 80(5), 056117.         Fischman, A. J., & Hall, J. E. (2008). Evaluation of prefrontal–
LaPlante, R. A., Douw, L., Tang, W., & Stufﬂebeam, S. M. (2014).             hippocampal effective connectivity following 24 hours of estro-
   The connectome visualization utility: Software for visualization          gen infusion: An FDG-PET study. Psychoneuroendocrinology,
   of human brain networks. PLoS One, 9(12), e113838.                        33(10), 1419–1425.
Liluashvili, V., Kalayci, S., Flouder, E., Wilson, M., Gabow, A., &       Pieloth, C., Pizarro, J. M., Knosche, T., Maess, B., & Fuchs, M. (2013).
   Gümüş, Z. H. (2016). iCAVE: An open source tool for immersive              An online system for neuroelectromagnetic source imaging.



Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                          360
NeuroCave: Immersive visualization platform



   In: IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Data Acquisition        Thompson, J., Kuchera-Morin, J., Novak, M., Overholt, D., Putnam,
   and Advanced Computing Systems (IDAACS) (pp. 270–274).                     L., Wakeﬁeld, G., & Smith, W. (2009). The AlloBrain: An inter-
Purgato, A., Santambrogio, M., Berger-Wolf, T., & Forbes, A. G.               active, stereographic, 3D audio, immersive virtual world. Inter-
   (2017). Interactive visualization for brain spatiotemporal net-            national Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 67(11), 934–946.
   works. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on           Van den Heuvel, M. P., & Sporns, O. (2011). Rich-club organiza-
   Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI) (pp. 21–24).                       tion of the human connectome. Journal of Neuroscience, 31(44),
Rojas, G. M., Gálvez, M., Vega Potler, N., Craddock, R. C.,                   15775–15786.
   Margulies, D. S., Castellanos, F. X., & Milham, M. P. (2014).            Vogel, H. (1979). A better way to construct the sunﬂower head.
   Stereoscopic three-dimensional visualization applied to multi-             Mathematical Biosciences, 44(3-4), 179–189.
   modal brain images: Clinical applications and a functional con-          Wallace, M., Luine, V., Arellanos, A., & Frankfurt, M. (2006).
   nectivity atlas. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 8, 328.                        Ovariectomized rats show decreased recognition memory and
Rosvall, M., & Bergstrom, C. T. (2008). Maps of random walks on               spine density in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex. Brain
   complex networks reveal community structure. Proceedings of                Research, 1126(1), 176–182.
   the National Academy of Sciences, 105(4), 1118–1123.                     Ware, C., & Mitchell, P. (2008). Visualizing graphs in three dimen-
Russell, D. M., Steﬁk, M. J., Pirolli, P., & Card, S. K. (1993). The cost     sions. ACM Transactions on Applied Perception (TAP), 5(1), 2.
   structure of sensemaking. In: Proceedings of the ACM INTER-              Wu, J., Yu, L., & Yu, H. (2015). Texture-based edge bundling:
   ACT and CHI conference on human factors in computing systems               A web-based approach for interactively visualizing large graphs.
   (pp. 269–276).                                                             In: IEEE international conference on big data (pp. 2501–2508).
Salvador, R., Suckling, J., Coleman, M. R., Pickard, J. D., Menon,          Xia, M., Wang, J., & He, Y. (2013). BrainNet Viewer: A network
   D., & Bullmore, E. (2005). Neurophysiological architecture of              visualization tool for human brain connectomics. PLoS One,
   functional magnetic resonance images of human brain. Cerebral              8(7), e68910.
   Cortex, 15(9), 1332–1342.                                                Xing, M., Ajilore, O., Wolfson, O., Abbott, C., MacNamara, A.,
Sherif, T., Kassis, N., Rousseau, M.-É., Adalat, R., & Evans, A. C.           Tadayonnejad, R., . . . Leow, A. (2016). Thought chart: Tracking
   (2015). BrainBrowser: Distributed, web-based neurological data             dynamic EEG brain connectivity with unsupervised manifold
   visualization. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics, 8, 89.                       learning. In G. Ascoli, M. Hawrylycz, H. Ali, D. Khazaranchi,
Sporns, O., & Betzel, R. F. (2016). Modular brain networks. Annual            & Y. Shi (Eds.), Brain informatics and health (Vol. 9919
   Review of Psychology, 67(1), 613–640.                                      of Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 149–157). Cham:
Sporns, O., Tononi, G., & Kötter, R. (2005). The human con-                   Springer.
   nectome: A structural description of the human brain. PLoS               Ye, A. Q., Ajilore, O., Conte, G., GadElkarim, J., Thomas-Ramos,
   Computational Biology, 1(4), e42.                                          G., Zhan, L., . . . Leow, A. D. (2015). The intrinsic geometry of
Stevens, M. C., Clark, V. P., & Prestwood, K. M. (2005). Low-dose es-         the human brain connectome. Brain Informatics, 2(4), 197–210.
   tradiol alters brain activity. Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging,        Ye, A. Q., Zhan, L., Conrin, S., GadElKarim, J., Zhang, A., Yang, S.,
   139(3), 199–217.                                                           . . . Leow, A. (2015). Measuring embeddedness: Hierarchical
Tang, J., Liu, J., Zhang, M., & Mei, Q. (2016). Visualizing large-scale       scale-dependent information exchange efﬁciency of the human
   and high-dimensional data. In: Proceedings of the 25th interna-            brain connectome. Human Brain Mapping, 36(9), 3653–3665.
   tional conference on world wide web (pp. 287–297).                       Zhan, L., Jenkins, L. M., Wolfson, O., GadElkarim, J. J., Nocito, K.,
Tenenbaum, J. B., De Silva, V., & Langford, J. C. (2000). A global            Thompson, P. M., . . . Leow, A. D. (2017). The signiﬁcance of ne-
   geometric framework for nonlinear dimensionality reduction.                gative correlations in brain connectivity. Journal of Comparative
   Science, 290(5500), 2319–2323.                                             Neurology, 525(15), 3251–3265.




Network Neuroscience                                                                                                                        361
