           sensors
Article
Integrating Spherical Panoramas and Maps for
Visualization of Cultural Heritage Objects Using
Virtual Reality Technology
Mila Koeva 1, *, Mila Luleva 2 and Plamen Maldjanski 3
 1    Faculty of Geo-information Science and Earth Observation, University of Twente, Hengelosestraat 99,
      7514 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
 2    SoilCares Research BV, 6709 PA Wageningen, The Netherlands; mila.luleva@soilcaresresearch.com
 3    University of Architecture Civil Engineering and Geodesy, Sofia 1164, Bulgaria; maldjanp_fgs@uacg.bg
 *    Correspondence: m.n.koeva@utwente.nl; Tel.: +31-(0)53-487-4410

 Academic Editor: Ayman F. Habib
 Received: 6 November 2016; Accepted: 7 April 2017; Published: 11 April 2017

 Abstract: Development and virtual representation of 3D models of Cultural Heritage (CH) objects has
 triggered great interest over the past decade. The main reason for this is the rapid development in the
 fields of photogrammetry and remote sensing, laser scanning, and computer vision. The advantages
 of using 3D models for restoration, preservation, and documentation of valuable historical and
 architectural objects have been numerously demonstrated by scientists in the field. Moreover, 3D
 model visualization in virtual reality has been recognized as an efficient, fast, and easy way of
 representing a variety of objects worldwide for present-day users, who have stringent requirements
 and high expectations. However, the main focus of recent research is the visual, geometric, and
 textural characteristics of a single concrete object, while integration of large numbers of models
 with additional information—such as historical overview, detailed description, and location—are
 missing. Such integrated information can be beneficial, not only for tourism but also for accurate
 documentation. For that reason, we demonstrate in this paper an integration of high-resolution
 spherical panoramas, a variety of maps, GNSS, sound, video, and text information for representation
 of numerous cultural heritage objects. These are then displayed in a web-based portal with an intuitive
 interface. The users have the opportunity to choose freely from the provided information, and decide
 for themselves what is interesting to visit. Based on the created web application, we provide
 suggestions and guidelines for similar studies. We selected objects, which are located in Bulgaria—a
 country with thousands of years of history and cultural heritage dating back to ancient civilizations.
 The methods used in this research are applicable for any type of spherical or cylindrical images
 and can be easily followed and applied in various domains. After a visual and metric assessment
 of the panoramas and the evaluation of the web-portal, we conclude that this novel approach is a
 very effective, fast, informative, and accurate way to present, disseminate, and document cultural
 heritage objects.

 Keywords: virtual reality; 3D modelling; photogrammetry; visualization; panoramic images;
 integration; interactive visualization; cultural heritage




1. Introduction
    In recent years, advances in the field of photogrammetry and remote sensing, laser scanning,
computer graphics, robotics, surveying, and internet-related technologies have opened up new
opportunities for visualization and proper documentation of cultural heritage (natural, cultural,
or mixed) [1]. These new technologies help to preserve the memory of historic buildings, archaeological


Sensors 2017, 17, 829; doi:10.3390/s17040829                                    www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                               2 of 15



sites, and landscapes [1,2]. Web-based Virtual Reality (VR) environments are an easy way to represent
and disseminate Cultural Heritage (CH) among a variety of people. It supports a country’s economic
growth by stimulating cultural tourism. Therefore, preservation and visualization of such places of
interest have always been a serious challenge for specialists in the field of cultural heritage. There
are a number of problems that specialists can face during the process of 3D modelling for cultural
heritage representation. These include difficulties in selecting the technology for image acquisition
and post-processing, defining the proper workflow in order to acquire a high visual and metric
quality of the final products, integrating other types of data (including archives), and web-based
visualization. As in other domains, one of the major issues is how to manage, process, and disseminate
variety of data via the internet in an application that is easy to use. This data requires storage space,
powerful processing software, and hardware and experienced professionals. To find the balance
between quality and speed (speed of rendering and speed of downloading data) is quite challenging.
Nowadays, an impressive evolution has been observed in 3D model creation, not only for existing
objects, buildings, or complete cities, but also for virtual reconstruction of destroyed or damaged
objects. Resent research in the field proved the contribution of 3D modelling and visualization for
restoration, preservation, conservation, and documentation of CH [3–6], web-based computer-aided
restoration [7], and multimedia museums [8].
       Various acquisition techniques have been used for 3D model creation both aerial and terrestrial.
Low-cost solutions with up-to-date fit-for-purpose technologies have also been found suitable for this
task [9–11]. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) independently and in combination with Terrestrial Laser
Scanning (TLS), have been considered as very suitable acquisition techniques in terms of accuracy,
resolution, and coverage for cultural heritage [12–14]. 3D modelling of historical objects as well as
image-based modelling using laser scanning technology, aiming in automatization, have shown great
potential [15–21].
       Naturally, the selection of the most suitable and effective technology is strongly related to the
specific requirements of each project, its budget and the experience of the users. 3D modelling and
visualization for objects with high level of complexity, supported with additional information and map
representation, is still a challenging topic for most researchers in the field. A variety of combinations
from the available acquisition techniques have been investigated by researchers [22–29]. More precisely,
the main focus has been on metric capabilities with high-resolution rotating cameras [30–35]. Due to the
large field-of-view limiting the number of acquisitions and the high-resolution content, photorealistic
modelling, the use of spherical images for spherical photogrammetry for photorealistic modeling,
has recently received increasing attention. In addition, researchers working on representation of
architectural and archaeological objects have shown great interest in using spherical photogrammetry
for photorealistic modelling. The main reason for this is the low cost of the equipment used for
acquisition of spherical images [36–40]. These researchers have shown that high-resolution accurate
data obtained using such technology are extremely beneficial for the creation of 3D models of cultural
heritage objects.
       Therefore, the technological development in the fields of photogrammetry, laser scanning, and
computer vision nowadays is providing opportunities for web-based Virtual Reality (VR) visualization.
It is a very efficient, fast, and easy way to represent architectural and archaeological objects worldwide
for variety of users [41]. Virtual reality has extensively been used recently in various applications
such as medicine [42], architecture and environmental planning [43], mechanical and aerospace
engineering [44], and education [45]. The evolution of virtual data representation possibilities such
as Virtual Reality Modelling language (VRML) web-based applications, together with the easy and
widely available internet access, are becoming a very suitable solutions for dissemination of cultural
heritage [46,47].
       Following the developments in the field, scientists in Bulgaria have also put a lot of effort in to
preserving national cultural heritage and keeping inherited traditions from the past. In 2008, as an
example of the development of virtual reality representations of heritage in the region, Sofia’s Virtual
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                               3 of 15



Museum was developed. Other interesting results have been presented by the Bulgarian Academy of
Science at the First International Workshop on Virtual Archaeology, Museums & Cultural Tourism in
Greece (2013). Miglena Vasileva presented several examples of 3D reconstructions, including the Grand
Palace with the throne room in Pliska and the Kings complex in Preslav. To achieve a high degree of
realism, numerous computer graphics techniques with a combination of integrated audio and video
effects were shown. Other examples of 3D have been reported by Maldzhanski and Koeva [48–50].
      Many researchers shared the need of representation of cultural heritage using virtual and
augmented reality. The first tests using virtual and augmented reality were reported in [51–54]. The
advantages were shared by Reffat in 2013 [55] and, later on, the problems related with standardization
of the user interface were discussed in the computer vision community [56]. The usage of spherical
photogrammetry for these purposes was also extensively researched nationally (in Bulgaria) and
internationally [57,58]. However, current research in the field focuses mostly on the photogrammetric
principles and technologies for a single model creation and object restoration [59] or a museum
including several indoor objects using simplified map representation only for basic orientation, which
are presented through a “virtual tour”. An example of this is the Louvre Virtual Museum [60] where
spherical panoramic images and frame pictures are integrated into a portal. However, the resolution
is low and there is no map representation. Our work differs from these studies and improves on the
existing methods. The study provides an innovative way of bringing together diverse types of data for
visualization of cultural heritage, which requires storage space, software, hardware, and expertise to
be processed and integrated into a fast and high quality web application.
      In the current study, we provide a methodology for efficient acquisition, use, management,
integration, and dissemination of various types of data for effective visualization and documentation of
cultural heritage objects. More specifically, we investigate the processing and usage of high-resolution
spherical images for visualization of numerous objects into a fast and easily accessible web application.
This is also an innovative approach, which has not been reported by the scientific community in the
field to date.
      We performed a thorough analysis and review of studies in the field of visualization for cultural
heritage. Furthermore, based on this review, we carried out an evaluation of the available techniques
in order to select the most appropriate one. Therefore, the main scientific contribution of the current
research is the use of remote sensing technology for this application including the successful integration
of: (i) numerous high-resolution spherical panoramic images (indoors and outdoors), (ii) a variety of
interactive maps, and (iii) multimedia information. This information is processed, organized, linked,
and integrated into a web-based portal with an intuitive interface for exploration and documentation
of cultural heritage objects.
      Efficient data integration, management, documentation, and representation of cultural heritage
and landscapes today are a strategic priority not only to assure cultural treasures but to exploit them as
valuable economic assets. Furthermore, we provide information, suggestions, and general guidelines
for the processing and usage of spherical or cylindrical images, combined with other data for web
representation. These can be followed and applied in various scientific domains such as medicine,
architecture, education, environmental planning, etc.
      Our research presents a tested and applied methodology using remotely sensed data acquired in a
cheap, fast, and accurate way from a terrestrial platform, efficiently combined with map representation,
GNSS data, and other multimedia information. We believe this makes it valuable for the scientific
community and introduces a novelty to the field.

2. Materials and Methods
     There are two types of panoramic images: cylindrical and spherical. Both can be acquired with
linear array and rotating panoramic cameras, suitable for providing high-resolution images. There
are two methods for handling such images. The first method is based on 3D scene reconstruction,
for example, through space intersection, from multiple spherical panoramic images generated by
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                 4 of 15



stitching frame images [61]. This is the process of aligning and projecting the images for the creation of
multi-image photos. The second method is to acquire overlapping images from a single point. Such an
acquisition is possible when using a frame-CCD camera rotated around its perspective center, mounted
on a dedicated tripod. During the image acquisition, the projection center and the focal length remain
constant. Once created, the spherical images are mapped using equirectangular projection [62]. The
relationship between a point on an image and a point on the object can be expressed by two collinearity
equations [63]. The images are stitched together and are projected on a virtual sphere whose radius is
equal to the focal length of the camera [64]. Nowadays, there are numerous software programs used
for automatic mosaicking of images (stitching).
      The primary goal of this research was to investigate how appropriate the spherical panoramas are
for integration with other types of data in a virtual reality environment. This is why extensive metric
information was not considered necessary. However, we made an investigation on the suitability of
the acquired panoramas for metric purposes in case the user would like to perform measurements
using the spherical panoramas. Distance measurements, using a tape, were taken only for several
selected objects during the image acquisition period. Ground Control Points (GCP) were not measured
on the objects. Therefore, since we had only one spherical image per object and no stereoscopy was
possible, we followed the methodology used and described by Fangi [37–39]. The method is called
“monoplotting” and is suitable when the surface of the object is known. Then as it was described by
Fangi it is possible to intersect this surface with the projective rays coming only from one panorama.
      We did not measure GCPs since this was out of the scope of our current research. For several
selected objects during the image acquisition period, distance measurements with a tape were taken,
in order to evaluate the metric qualities of the created panoramas. We measured distances between
easily distinguishable points on the objects which can be easily found and measured on the images.
The results from our tests, using monoplotting, which we also compared with results obtained from
other researchers in the field, can be taken as an additional information for the users who would like
to use panoramas for measurements.
      In this research, we selected Tourweaver® (Easypano Holding Inc., Shanghai, China) [65] to
develop a virtual representation. It allows the integration of numerous panoramas into a web-portal.

2.1. Study Area
     We selected historical objects located in four municipalities in the Central-Northern part of
Bulgaria—Lovech, Troyan, Letniza, Aprilci. Some of the oldest towns in Bulgaria are located in this
region including Lovech and Troyan. Their first inhabitants were Tracians, whose traces date back
to the third century BC. Over the centuries, the region became famous for its unique archaeological
and architectural heritage, applied arts and crafts, ethnography, and folklore. Therefore, with the
development in information technology, the questions surrounding documentation, preservation, and
popularization of the valuable cultural heritage have undoubtedly been raised [66].

2.2. Object Selection and Location
      For the purpose of the study, 50 objects were chosen, as they are considered interesting to be
visited by potential tourists. These objects were then grouped according to themes and located along
six touristic routes. These are: (1) and (2) natural (with caves, waterfalls, eco paths, etc.), (3) cultural
(galleries, museums, historical, archaeological, and architectural monuments), (4) traditional (museums
for applied arts and crafts), (5) religious (churches and monasteries), and (6) recreation (mineral water
resources). Each of these routes was visualized using ArcGIS software package, creating a map with
3D survey representation (Figure 1). Coordinates of the objects on the routes were determined using
hand-held Garmin GNSS.
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                         5 of 15
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                         5 of 15




                              (a)                        (b)                        (c)




                              (d)                        (e)                        (f)

      Figure 1. Map of the region representing the four municipalities and maps with the distribution of 50
      Figure 1. Map of the region representing the four municipalities and maps with the distribution
      objects into six routes. (a,b) natural (with caves, waterfalls, eco paths etc.), (c) cultural (galleries,
      of 50 objects into six routes. (a,b) natural (with caves, waterfalls, eco paths etc.), (c) cultural
      museums, historical, archaeological, and architectural monuments), (d) traditional (museums for
      (galleries, museums, historical, archaeological, and architectural monuments), (d) traditional (museums
      applied arts and crafts), (e) religious (churches and monasteries), and (f) recreation (mineral water
      for applied arts and crafts), (e) religious (churches and monasteries), and (f) recreation (mineral
      resources).
      water resources).

2.3. Image Acquisition and Post Processing
2.3. Image Acquisition and Post Processing
      For some of the objects, such as churches and monasteries, signed permission for their acquisition
      For some of the objects, such as churches and monasteries, signed permission for their acquisition
was needed which was obtained with the help of municipalities. Technical equipment used for
was needed which was obtained with the help of municipalities. Technical equipment used for
acquiring spherical images was Canon EOS 1Ds Mark 3 (5616 × 3744) with Sigma 15 mm, f/2.8L lenses
acquiring spherical images was Canon EOS 1Ds Mark 3 (5616 × 3744) with Sigma 15 mm, f/2.8L
mounted on a Manfrotto 808RC4 with spherical tripod head Nodal Ninja 5R with D16 rotator. This
lenses mounted on a Manfrotto 808RC4 with spherical tripod head Nodal Ninja 5R with D16 rotator.
spherical head has a special adjustment that allows it to be rotated on a tripod over the “pupil” to
This spherical head has a special adjustment that allows it to be rotated on a tripod over the “pupil”
eliminate any vertical parallax (shift of the foreground objects relative to the background ones). The
to eliminate any vertical parallax (shift of the foreground objects relative to the background ones).
images were taken using f9-stop aperture in order to use the maximum advantages of the lenses.
The images were taken using f9-stop aperture in order to use the maximum advantages of the lenses.
      The camera was placed on a tripod Manfrotto 808RC4, and the height of the set-up was set to 1.5 m.
      The camera was placed on a tripod Manfrotto 808RC4, and the height of the set-up was set to
The camera was then remotely controlled from a minimum distance of 5 m. The camera rotated
1.5 m. The camera was then remotely controlled from a minimum distance of 5 m. The camera rotated
automatically and took images at regular intervals of 60°. The distance between the tripod and the
automatically and took images at regular intervals of 60◦ . The distance between the tripod and the
objects at the time of capturing the panoramas, was 2–8 m.
objects at the time of capturing the panoramas, was 2–8 m.
      The original raw images were converted with specialized software Capture One7 [67], while the
      The original raw images were converted with specialized software Capture One7 [67], while the
stitching for panorama creation was done using High Dynamic Range (HDR) Expose 3 and SNS-HDR
stitching for panorama creation was done using High Dynamic Range (HDR) Expose 3 and SNS-HDR
Pro. This stitching software was selected because it offers automatic removal of the shadow created
Pro. This stitching software was selected because it offers automatic removal of the shadow created
by the tripod and automatic equalization of brightness and contrast differences, which undoubtedly
by the tripod and automatic equalization of brightness and contrast differences, which undoubtedly
exist in every mosaicking process. This system is definitely easy for use and satisfies the requirements
exist in every mosaicking process. This system is definitely easy for use and satisfies the requirements
for a flexible and seamless stitching process. In cases where smooth visualization or correction of
for a flexible and seamless stitching process. In cases where smooth visualization or correction of
disturbances was required, Adobe Photoshop CS6 [68] was used.
disturbances was required, Adobe Photoshop CS6 [68] was used.
2.4. Panorama Creation
2.4. Panorama Creation
      For the creation of 50 (exterior and interior) panoramas, a total of 3200 images were captured
      For the creation of 50 (exterior and interior) panoramas, a total of 3200 images were captured and
and stitched using Pano2VR4 64 bit and PTGui [69]. The final panoramas were saved into lower
stitched using Pano2VR4 64 bit and PTGui [69]. The final panoramas were saved into lower resolution
resolution (see example in Figure 2). The downsampling of the images had to be performed because
of technical limitations of the web-server of the municipalities (Lovech, Troyan, Letniza, Aprilci) and
to allow users a fast and smooth visualization experience of the cultural heritage sites. We tested
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                                   6 of 15



(see example in Figure 2). The downsampling of the images had to be performed because of technical
limitations of the web-server of the municipalities (Lovech, Troyan, Letniza, Aprilci) and to allow
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                                   6 of 15
users a fast and smooth visualization experience of the cultural heritage sites. We tested different
downsampling
different             ratios in order
             downsampling          ratiostoinfind
                                                order   to find between
                                                   the balance                image
                                                                    the balance         resolution
                                                                                    between       image     computational
                                                                                                       and resolution     and
  Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                             6 of 15
computational efficiency in terms of rendering and downloading speed. The aim wasfast,
efficiency    in  terms   of  rendering    and   downloading       speed.    The  aim    was   to  have   a       easy,a fast,
                                                                                                             to have      and
smooth
easy,  andvisualization
  different  smooth
               downsampling everywhere
                        visualization      in
                                            in the
                                        everywhere
                                    ratios         world
                                                order  in  with
                                                        tothe     less
                                                                   the possible
                                                               world
                                                            find        with lesstechnical
                                                                         balance              requirements.
                                                                                   between technical
                                                                                  possible                requirements.
                                                                                                image resolutionIn this
                                                                                                                      andway,
                                                                                                                            In
we
thisallowed     also
     way, we allowed
  computational       users  with
                      efficiency   limited
                                  users
                             also in terms   internet
                                          with         bandwidth
                                                limited internet
                                            of rendering              connection
                                                                     bandwidthspeed.
                                                           and downloading         to access
                                                                                  connection   and
                                                                                          The aim    smoothlyhavesmoothly
                                                                                                      was to and
                                                                                                  to access        a fast,the
                                                                                                                browse
web   portal.
  easy,
browse   and
           thesmooth
                 webtheportal.
               For       portal,For
                                  panoramas
                         visualizationthe       werepanoramas
                                                       divided
                                         everywhere
                                           portal,               into
                                                       in the world    themes
                                                                            lessand
                                                                       with
                                                                     were  divided   visualized
                                                                                       intotechnical
                                                                                 possible    themes in “thumbnails”
                                                                                                        requirements.
                                                                                                        and visualized  Inthe
                                                                                                                       at    in
bottom    of
“thumbnails” the
  this way, weat   screen
                    allowed(Figure   3)
                              also users
                                    of thewith
                      the bottom        in different
                                                limited
                                           screen     colors
                                                    (Figure   just
                                                         internet   like the
                                                             3) in bandwidth routes   on  the
                                                                                 connection
                                                                    different colors           maps.
                                                                                               tothe
                                                                                                   access
                                                                                       just like       routes  smoothly
                                                                                                           andon  the maps.
  browse the web portal. For the portal, panoramas were divided into themes and visualized in
  “thumbnails” at the bottom of the screen (Figure 3) in different colors just like the routes on the maps.




             Figure 2. Example of spherical panorama. Museum of crafts and applied arts in Troyan.
             Figure 2. Example of spherical panorama. Museum of crafts and applied arts in Troyan.
               Figure 2. Example of spherical panorama. Museum of crafts and applied arts in Troyan.




         Figure
       Figure 3. 3.
                 MapMapappearance
                        appearanceover     spherical panorama
                                        thespherical
                                   overthe           panoramaof  theHoly
                                                              ofthe  HolyTrinity
                                                                          TrinityOrthodox
                                                                                  OrthodoxChurch
                                                                                           Churchin Lovech.
                                                                                                    in Lovech.
      Figure 3. Map appearance over the spherical panorama of the Holy Trinity Orthodox Church in Lovech.
  2.5.
2.5.   AdditionalInput
     Additional               forthe
                         Datafor
                   InputData      theWeb-Portal
                                     Web-Portal
       High-
     High-               frameimages
              resolutionframe
            resolution           imageswere
                                        were additionally    capturedwith
                                              additionally captured   withCanon
                                                                           CanonEOSEOS5D5D
                                                                                         Mark
                                                                                           Mark2 (5616 × 3744)
                                                                                                  2 (5616 × 3744)
  with  lenses  EF  24-70,  f/2.8L USM;   EF   70-200,  f/2.8L USM   telephoto  extender
with lenses EF 24-70, f/2.8L USM; EF 70-200, f/2.8L USM telephoto extender Extender EF 2× Extender   EF  2×  II II
  mounted    on a Slik tripod.  The different  type of lenses  were used  only for the normal frame
mounted on a Slik tripod. The different type of lenses were used only for the normal frame images.    images.
  For the spherical panoramas, we used only Sigma 15 mm, f/2.8L. Therefore, an open source tool was
For the spherical panoramas, we used only Sigma 15 mm, f/2.8L. Therefore, an open source tool was
  integrated into the portal for their visualization. Team of professional actors were asked to record
integrated into the portal for their visualization. Team of professional actors were asked to record
  their experience while visiting all of the selected cultural objects in a video format. They recorded
their experience while visiting all of the selected cultural objects in a video format. They recorded
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                                         7 of 15



2.5. Additional Input Data for the Web-Portal
      High- resolution frame images were additionally captured with Canon EOS 5D Mark 2
(5616 × 3744) with lenses EF 24-70, f/2.8L USM; EF 70-200, f/2.8L USM telephoto extender Extender EF
2× II mounted on a Slik tripod. The different type of lenses were used only for the normal frame images.
For the spherical panoramas, we used only Sigma 15 mm, f/2.8L. Therefore, an open source tool was
integrated into the portal for their visualization. Team of professional actors were asked to record
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                                          7 of 15
their experience while visiting all of the selected cultural objects in a video format. They recorded
historical   information and
historical information               tookinterviews
                                           interviewswith
                               andtook                            thelocal
                                                            withthe    localpeople.
                                                                               people.TheThe  video,
                                                                                           video,        which
                                                                                                      which   waswas    delivering
                                                                                                                    delivering     all
all the  information      for  needed    tourists,   was    uploaded      into  YouTube    and
the information for needed tourists, was uploaded into YouTube and the link was imported into thethe   link  was   imported     into
the  web-portal
web-portal      (see(see   Figure
                      Figure        3 bottom
                                3 bottom         right).
                                             right).       Additionally,
                                                       Additionally,                navigatingininthe
                                                                             whilenavigating
                                                                           while                            portal, the
                                                                                                       theportal,     the sound
                                                                                                                          sound of  of
nature   and   birds  was   recorded    and    integrated    with   the  option   to be  switched
nature and birds was recorded and integrated with the option to be switched off and on depending      off and  on   depending     on
the  users’
on the       wish
         users’     (see(see
                  wish     Figure   3 bottom
                               Figure   3 bottom left).
                                                     left).
      To
       To integrate the obtained spherical panoramas
           integrate    the  obtained    spherical       panoramas with with interactive
                                                                               interactive maps,
                                                                                             maps, video,
                                                                                                        video, sound,
                                                                                                                sound, and and text
                                                                                                                                 text
information,      Tour   Weaver      software     was    selected.   Since
information, Tour Weaver software was selected. Since user interface is not standardized, VRML
                                                                              user  interface  is   not   standardized,      VRML
browsers complying
browsers     complying with with ISO
                                   ISO standard
                                        standard differ.
                                                      differ. Since   the selected
                                                               Since the    selected software
                                                                                      software is  is developed
                                                                                                      developed to   to be
                                                                                                                        be applied
                                                                                                                            applied
in  different  domains,     there   was  no   suitable    interface  in  the  offered   ones for  the   current
in different domains, there was no suitable interface in the offered ones for the current task. Therefore,        task.  Therefore,
we designed
     designed every
we                every button
                          button that
                                   that had
                                         had to to be
                                                   be visualized
                                                       visualized in in the
                                                                         the viewer
                                                                              viewer inin CorelDraw,
                                                                                          CorelDraw, in    in different
                                                                                                              different sizes
                                                                                                                          sizes and
                                                                                                                                 and
colors, depending
colors,   depending on   on its
                             its function    (active or
                                 function (active      or passive,
                                                           passive, switched
                                                                      switched on/off      etc.).
                                                                                   on/off etc.).
      Several
       Several versions
                  versions of     the overall
                                       overall design
                              of the                         were developed
                                                                     developed to
                                                   design were                          ensure that
                                                                                    to ensure     that users’
                                                                                                         users’ needs
                                                                                                                  needs are are met.
                                                                                                                                met.
Navigation
Navigation tools        werepositioned
                                positionedatatthe
                 toolswere                         thetoptop   of the
                                                            of the      screen
                                                                   screen        to assist
                                                                             to assist      users.
                                                                                        users. Buttons  Buttons    were made
                                                                                                            were made              to
                                                                                                                           to adjust
adjust   the speed    of  the  visualization,     and   to allow   going   back   and   forward
the speed of the visualization, and to allow going back and forward to the next panorama, and to   to  the  next  panorama,      and
to zoom
zoom    in in and
            and        InIn
                    out.
                  out.       addition,
                           addition,   we we   inserteda ahome
                                            inserted                buttonand
                                                             homebutton              switch-to-full-screen and
                                                                              andaaswitch-to-full-screen               information
                                                                                                                and information
button.   (Figure 4)
button. (Figure      4)




                                         Figure 4. Screenshot from the web-portal.
                                         Figure 4. Screenshot from the web-portal.

      A switch is designed to be used by the users in case they would like to select an alternative route.
      A switch
The users        is designed
            are also                  used by the
                                to be between
                      able to select                   usersobjects
                                                             in casealong
                                                  specific             they would
                                                                              the selected       selectthrough
                                                                                        like toroutes   an alternative   route.
                                                                                                                 two arrows,
The
which   weare
     users      also ableright
             positioned     to select
                                  andbetween
                                       left in thespecific  objects
                                                      screen. We made alongan  theinformation
                                                                                    selected routes    through
                                                                                                   button,  marked     arrows,
                                                                                                                  twowith   (i),
which   we  positioned     right  and  left  in the   screen.  We   made     an  information       button,
which is enabled when a specific object is selected. There is also a picture button, which visualizes       marked    with  (i),
which   is enabled    when    a specific  object   is  selected.  There    is also   a picture    button,
frame images of the selected object. In addition, we integrated a Bing map with Satellite and Hybrid       which    visualizes
frame  images
options.        of theusing
           Moreover,     selected   object.
                                ArcGIS       In addition,
                                         software,           we integrated
                                                       we additionally           a Bing
                                                                            created       map with
                                                                                       different   mapSatellite  and Hybrid
                                                                                                         representations    for
options.   Moreover,    using   ArcGIS   software,     we  additionally     created    different   map
the central prats of the cities with more details (Figure 3). On these maps, the routes were separately  representations    for
the central with
visualized   pratsaof   the cities
                      unique   color. Wemore
                                    with          detailsa(Figure
                                            performed       number3).ofOn teststhese   maps, the
                                                                                  concerning     maproutes   were separately
                                                                                                       representation,    until
visualized   with  a  unique   color. We   performed
we were able to obtain smooth and fast web visualization. a number     of tests   concerning     map   representation,    until
we were able to obtain smooth and fast web visualization.
      The
      The additional
           additional rotating     radar function
                         rotating radar    function was was integrated
                                                            integrated in     the portal
                                                                           in the   portal in
                                                                                            in order
                                                                                                order to
                                                                                                       to help
                                                                                                          help the
                                                                                                                the user
                                                                                                                     user with
                                                                                                                          with
orientation.  This   function   is to be enabled     and   used  simultaneously        with   selecting
orientation. This function is to be enabled and used simultaneously with selecting an object. To solve    an object.  To solve
the problem
the  problem with
               with thethe large
                            large size
                                   size of
                                         of the   data, the
                                             the data,    the panoramas
                                                              panoramas were   were resampled
                                                                                       resampled fromfrom the
                                                                                                            the original
                                                                                                                 original full
                                                                                                                           full
resolution before
resolution   before being    imported in
                      being imported      in the
                                              the web-portal.
                                                  web-portal.
      The   web-portal was
      The web-portal       wastested
                                 testedbefore
                                         beforepublishing
                                                    publishing fromfromfivefive   potential
                                                                             potential         users.
                                                                                          users.               them them
                                                                                                         We asked
                                                                                                   We asked                  to
                                                                                                                      to share
share  their  observations,     recommendations,          and  difficulties     while   navigating,
their observations, recommendations, and difficulties while navigating, locating, and using it. This    locating,   and  using
it.
gaveThis   gave usfeedback
      us precious     preciouswhich
                                  feedback
                                       was usedwhich     was used
                                                    to improve        to improve its
                                                                  its functionality     andfunctionality
                                                                                             to make it more and   to make it
                                                                                                                user-friendly.
more user-friendly.
2.6. General Guidelines
    In the current research the procedures described in the subsections above can be used as general
guidelines for similar studies in different domains. To underline the most important steps among
them, we can summarize them in the following baseline indications:
     Selection of a study area and objects for representation
     Acquisition of permissions for objects acquisition
     Selection of the acquisition technology
     Image acquisition, image post-processing, and image refinement
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                               8 of 15



2.6. General Guidelines
    In the current research the procedures described in the subsections above can be used as general
guidelines for similar studies in different domains. To underline the most important steps among
them, we can summarize them in the following baseline indications:

•     Selection of a study area and objects for representation
•     Acquisition of permissions for objects acquisition
•     Selection of the acquisition technology
•     Image acquisition, image post-processing, and image refinement
•     Panorama stitching and rendering (if spherical or cylindrical panoramas are used)
•     Software selection for virtual representation
•     Map creation and adjustment for their visualization in different resolutions and browsers
•     Selection of additional information for multimedia representation (GNSS objects coordinates,
      frame images, video, sound, etc.)
•     Selecting and experimenting with different options for their better visualization
•     Design of user friendly interface of the application
•     Testing the performance of the created web (or offline working) application until approval

3. Results
     From the website of the four municipalities, the result of the current study the web portal can be
visualized and ran in all common browsers, such as Mozilla Firefox, Internet Explorer, and Google
Chrome [70] (Figure 3). From the upper right corner, the user can select the preferred language from
English, Bulgarian, or Russian.
     To assess the obtained metric qualities of the spherical panoramas we used the method called
“monoplotting” theoretically described and applied by Fangi [37–40,71]. For several selected objects
during the image acquisition period, distance measurements with a tape were taken in order to evaluate
the metric qualities of the created panoramas. We measured distances between easily distinguishable
points (corners) on the objects which can be easily found and measured on the images. Using Erdas
software, we transformed the panoramas of the selected objects and we measured in their central
parts where no distortions were observed. For the objects with irregular or oval shape taken from
a distance less than 5 m. In reality, after comparison of the distance measurements taken with a
tape on the real objects and measure in the software the result of the difference was 0.1 m. A similar
experiment was done on a panorama taken from a longer distance where we obtained a difference
of 0.3 m. However, after we selected an indoor panorama of a museum with a clear linear structure
and features which lie on a plane, we obtained better results at 0.01 m. For evaluation of the achieved
results, we made compared our results with those obtained from other researchers using the same
method. We found that Karras et al. [72] reported similar results to ours. After resampling of the
images, performing radiometric corrections, and mosaic creation they calculated the RMS differences
of similarity transformation between mosaic and control points in X and Y = 0.014 m and in Z = 0.005 m.
The difference in their research is that the distortions and inaccuracies in their case were mainly due to
the cylindrical object they were investigating.
     We also created 3D physical models of some of the cultural heritage objects. Such a method was
used because, in countries such as Bulgaria, sometimes a digital way of information sharing on the
internet is not enough. The 3D models were created based on the acquired frame images using 3D
StudioMax software (Figure 5) and printed using 3D Systems-ProJet®460Plus [73]. This is a full color
3D printer which operates with safe build materials, active dust control, and zero liquid waste. The
models were provided to the municipalities to catch people’s attention and encourage tourists to view
the portal and to visit the cultural heritage objects (Figure 6). The scale of the printed model is 1:500.
used because, in countries such as Bulgaria, sometimes a digital way of information sharing on the
internet is not enough. The 3D models were created based on the acquired frame images using 3D
StudioMax software (Figure 5) and printed using 3D Systems-ProJet® 460Plus [73]. This is a full color
3D printer which operates with safe build materials, active dust control, and zero liquid waste. The
models
Sensors   were
        2017, 17, provided
                  829      to the municipalities to catch people’s attention and encourage tourists to9viewof 15
the portal and to visit the cultural heritage objects (Figure 6). The scale of the printed model is 1:500.




      Figure 5. 3D models of Troyan Monastery and the Covered Bridge in Lovech created in 3D
      Figure 5. 3D models of Troyan Monastery and the Covered Bridge in Lovech created in 3D StudioMax.9 of 15
SensorsStudioMax.
        2017, 17, 829




               Figure 6. 3D printed models of Troyan Monastery and the Covered Bridge in Lovech.
                Figure 6. 3D printed models of Troyan Monastery and the Covered Bridge in Lovech.

4. Discussion
 4. Discussion
      The added value of 3D modelling and visualization has been demonstrated by many researchers
       The added value of 3D modelling and visualization has been demonstrated by many
[3–6]. Particularly, its importance for preserving cultural heritage is great because it gives us the
 researchers [3–6]. Particularly, its importance for preserving cultural heritage is great because it gives
opportunity to visualize spatial and temporal information for precious historical monuments and
 us the opportunity to visualize spatial and temporal information for precious historical monuments
objects of interest. However, 3D modelling and visualization have proven to be challenging. This is
 and objects of interest. However, 3D modelling and visualization have proven to be challenging.
mainly due to difficulties with data acquisition, data integration, and virtual representation. There is
 This is mainly due to difficulties with data acquisition, data integration, and virtual representation.
a great availability of sensors and platforms which is continuously developing [74]. The combinations
 There is a great availability of sensors and platforms which is continuously developing [74]. The
and integration of various data, automation, and real-time processing are topics that are in
 combinations and integration of various data, automation, and real-time processing are topics that
continuous research and will be further developed in the future [75]. However, the use of more
 are in continuous research and will be further developed in the future [75]. However, the use of
sophisticated technology does not always result in a user-friendly and readily-available product. This
 more sophisticated technology does not always result in a user-friendly and readily-available product.
is where the method presented in this paper adds value. It is an affordable, fast, and effective method
 This is where the method presented in this paper adds value. It is an affordable, fast, and effective
for the visualization of valuable historical and natural places in a modern and easy accessible way.
 method for the visualization of valuable historical and natural places in a modern and easy accessible
The product can be accessed via a web portal, while the geographical locations can be easily
 way. The product can be accessed via a web portal, while the geographical locations can be easily
downloaded onto any portable GNSS device. Assessment was done by investigating the level of
 downloaded onto any portable GNSS device. Assessment was done by investigating the level of
similarities between virtual representation and real world [76–78]. It was concluded that such
 similarities between virtual representation and real world [76–78]. It was concluded that such spherical
spherical panoramas integrated in a web-portal with additional types of information can be
 panoramas integrated in a web-portal with additional types of information can be undoubtedly used
undoubtedly used for the interactive representation of important historical monuments,
 for the interactive representation of important historical monuments, archaeological and architectural
archaeological and architectural objects, and other places important for cultural preservation. Due to
 objects, and other places important for cultural preservation. Due to the high resolution of the acquired
the high resolution of the acquired spherical panoramas the results from the visual assessment were
 spherical panoramas the results from the visual assessment were high. Even resampling to the lower
high. Even resampling to the lower resolution, which was needed for smooth navigation in the web
 resolution, which was needed for smooth navigation in the web environment, did not lower the visual
environment, did not lower the visual qualities of the panoramas.
 qualities of the panoramas.
      Except from visual assessment, we performed metric assessment of the quality of the panoramas.
       Except from visual assessment, we performed metric assessment of the quality of the panoramas.
Using the monoplotting method described by Fangi [37–40], the obtained metric qualities of the tested
 Using the monoplotting method described by Fangi [37–40], the obtained metric qualities of the tested
planar object in the current research was 0.01 m. Since metric investigation was not the primary goal
 planar object in the current research was 0.01 m. Since metric investigation was not the primary goal
of the research, we performed tape distance measurements of the objects in reality and compared the
 of the research, we performed tape distance measurements of the objects in reality and compared the
results with the those measured on the panorama which was transformed in Erdas software. The
 results with the those measured on the panorama which was transformed in Erdas software. The
information of our accuracy test can be considered as additional information for users who would
 information of our accuracy test can be considered as additional information for users who would like
like to use panoramas for measurements. If there is a need of extracting detailed metric information
 to use panoramas for measurements. If there is a need of extracting detailed metric information from
from spherical images, then we recommend precise measurements of Ground Control Points (GCPs)
 spherical images, then we recommend precise measurements of Ground Control Points (GCPs) on
on the objects to be made. The accuracy and reliability of this source of information has been proven
by a number of authors [37,40,61,79–81]. For example, measuring control directions and control
points with a reflectorless theodolite, the RMSE of the residuals obtained in the tests of Fangi were
0.027 m in planimetry and 0.009 m in height over 108 control points observed at least in three
panoramic images. Alternative solutions for improving metric qualities using multiple spherical
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                10 of 15



the objects to be made. The accuracy and reliability of this source of information has been proven by
a number of authors [37,40,61,79–81]. For example, measuring control directions and control points
with a reflectorless theodolite, the RMSE of the residuals obtained in the tests of Fangi were 0.027 m
in planimetry and 0.009 m in height over 108 control points observed at least in three panoramic
images. Alternative solutions for improving metric qualities using multiple spherical images and
testing different stitching methods were also researched [82,83].
     Metrically, the method of monoplotting we used in this research is suitable for planar surfaces.
For the current goal of this research the achieved visual and metric qualities were fully satisfactory.
For applications which require detailed representation and high metric qualities, the following methods
can be used: (i) for solving additional geometrical problems as in [6,39,66,84], (ii) interactive modelling
as in [82], and (iii) automatic orientation procedures as in [36].
     There are three main factors that determine the quality of the integrated spherical panoramas with
additional information into a web portal. These are appropriate selection of objects of interest based
on user experience, accurate selection of the equipment for the data acquisition and data processing
tools, and development of a user-friendly and easily accessible web-based platform or portal.

4.1. Selection of Objects of Interest
     The objects of interests were selected in collaboration with people from each of the four
municipalities. With the help of their expert knowledge, the objects of interest were grouped according
to themes, and located along six officially defined touristic routes. These groups are: (1) and (2) natural
(with caves, waterfalls, eco paths, etc.), (3) cultural (galleries, museums, historical, archaeological, and
architectural monuments), (4) traditional (museums for applied arts and crafts), (5) religious (churches
and monasteries), and (6) recreation (mineral water resources).

4.2. Selection of Appropriate Equipment and Data Processing Tools
     Canon EOS 1Ds Mark 3 and 5D Mark 2 camera with a D16 Rotator. The advantages of the D16
Rotator is that the user has sixteen choices for the spacing of “click stops”, as the head rotates [85].
The acquired images offer the possibility for accurate and attractive visualization, while allowing
integration of additional information into a web-portal. The overlap between the images depends
on the distance from the camera to the object. When using “manual mode” of the f9-stop aperture,
we take maximum advantage of the lenses. The exposure time was 1/250–30 s, using the principle
of Zeitraffer photography, which is needed for the software that we used for the post-processing of
the images.
     For the visual and metric qualities of the panoramas the resolution of the raw data and the
methods used for post-processing are of great importance. For the current task the visual quality was
very good due to the high-resolution of the input data and the post-processing was accurately done in
order to avoid any distortions.

4.3. Web Portal
      The aim of the web-portal was to integrate different types of input information, in order to
provide the users with different possibilities to make their choices. As a basis, the acquired spherical
images were used; however, additionally high resolution frame images were also linked to the objects.
They were visualized in a separate view done via integrating an open source tool for this purpose in
the portal. They appear at a click of the button “Pictures”. Since video has been considered as one of
the most powerful and efficient methods of visual communication and representation, we also decided
to include video in the portal in order to achieve our goal.
      In the designing of the web-portal, the most labor-and-time intensive tasks are linking the buttons
and assigning the action that they have to perform together with setting the time interval. After all the
settings have been selected, by clicking on a selected touristic object, the user can freely navigate in the
panoramic view, view an object location on several maps representations, obtain information about its
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                        11 of 15



position (GPS coordinates), select from the small panorama visualization in “Thumbnails”, investigate
the attached frame images, watch the video, and read the text containing historical information
(Figure 3).

5. Conclusions
     The paper presented the first virtual web-portal with an integration of numerous high-resolution
spherical panoramas, a variety of maps, frame images, GPS coordinates for the touristic routes,
sound, video, and text information representing the cultural heritage in Bulgaria. This result was
evaluated highly and positively accepted and presented nationally (Sofia, Veliko Turnovo, Russe) and
internationally (Finland, Germany, Great Britain, Russia). On a more local level, achievements were
presented in the news, local magazines and newspapers and were supported by government and
non-government organizations. We demonstrated an example of an operational and reproducible
procedure as it is easy to use, inexpensive, and presents reliable quality.
     This research concluded that the visual and metric qualities of high-resolution spherical
panoramas are sufficient for many applications. For tourism, virtual navigation, documentation,
and demonstration of numerous cultural objects, panoramas supported with additional information
and integrated into a web-portal are a suitable solution. As a recommendation, such interactive
visualizations can potentially be extended with virtual tours using avatars, perhaps even with a
voice. Further improvements are related to usage of more automatic web-based visualization using
interactive geo-special information.
     The topic is in constant research and, especially with rapid technological development, even more
accurate and detailed 3D models are expected to be used in web-based virtual reality applications.
     The availability of digital data and its use for 3D modelling and visualization opens possibilities
for variety of application and opportunities for analysis and interpretations. However, some
misunderstandings between technical scientists and specialists in cultural heritage exist, which have to
be solved in order to provide efficient documentation and preservation. The current study is a concrete
example of how such a problem can be solved.

Acknowledgments: This work was supported by Mapex Jsc. (http://www.mapex.bg/en), Svetla Petkova,
Alexander Nishkov (http://www.alanbg.com/), Tsvetan Ignatovski, Francesco Nex, and the operational program
for regional development.
Author Contributions: Mila Koeva is the main author. With support from professionals (in Acknowledgement),
she acquired the images, performed the post processing, created the portal and arranged the data, analyzed the
data, and wrote the paper. Mila Luleva took part in writing of the paper and performed a critical evaluation.
Plamen Maldjanski reviewed the paper and provided comments on the final draft.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
1.    Campanaro, D.M.; Landeschi, G.; Dell’Unto, N.; Touati, A.M.L. 3D GIS for cultural heritage restoration:
      A ‘white box’ workflow. J. Cult. Herit. 2016, 18, 321–332. [CrossRef]
2.    Remondino, F. Heritage recording and 3D modeling with photogrammetry and 3D scanning. Remote Sens.
      2011, 3, 1104–1138. [CrossRef]
3.    Barber, D.; Mills, J.; Bryan, P. Laser scanning and photogrammetry: 21st Century metrology. In Proceedings
      of the XVIII International CIPA Symposium on Surveying and Documentation of Historic Buildings,
      Monuments, Sites: Traditional and Modern Methods, Potsdam, Germany, 18–21 September 2001.
4.    Beraldin, J.A.; Picard, M.; El-Hakim, S.F.; Godin, G.; Valzano, V.; Bandiera, A. Combining 3D technologies
      for cultural heritage interpretation and entertainment. In Electronic Imaging; International Society for Optics
      and Photonics: Bellingham, WA, USA, 2005; pp. 108–118.
5.    Akca, D.; Remondino, F.; Novak, D.; Hanusch, T.; Schrotter, G.; Gruen, A. Recording and modelling of cultural
      heritage objects with coded structured light projection systems. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
      Conference on Remote Sensing in Archaeology, Rome, Italy, 4–7 December 2006; pp. 375–382.
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                         12 of 15



6.    Remondino, F.; Girardi, S.; Gonzo, L.; Rizzi, A. Multiresolution modeling of complex and detailed cultural
      heritage. In Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural
      Heritage (VAST 2008), Braga, Portugal, 2–5 December 2008; pp. 1–8.
7.    Fowles, P.S.; Larson, J.H.; Dean, C.; Solajic, M. The laser recording and virtual restoration of a wooden
      sculpture of Buddha. J. Cult. Herit. 2003, 4, 367–371. [CrossRef]
8.    Remondino, F.; Rizzi, A.; Agugiaro, G.; Girardi, S.; De Amicis, R.; Magliocchetti, D.; Girardi, G.; Baratti, G.
      Geomatics and geoinformatics for digital 3D documentation, fruition and valorization of cultural heritage.
      In Proceedings of the EUROMED 2010 Workshop on Museum Futures: Emerging Technological and Social
      Paradigms, Lemessos, Cyprus, 8–13 November 2010; pp. 8–13.
9.    Remondino, F.; El-Hakim, S. Image-based 3D modeling: A review. Photogramm. Rec. 2006, 21, 269–291.
      [CrossRef]
10.   Hanan, H.; Suwardhi, D.; Nurhasanah, T.; Santa Bukit, E. Batak Toba cultural heritage and close-range
      photogrammetry. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 2015, 184, 187–195. [CrossRef]
11.   Sužiedelytė-Visockienė, J.; Bagdžiūnaitė, R.; Malys, N.; Maliene, V. Close-range photogrammetry enables
      documentation of environment-induced deformation of architectural heritage. Environ. Eng. Manag. J. 2015,
      14, 1371–1381.
12.   Meyer, D.; Fraijo, E.; Lo, E.; Rissolo, D.; Kuester, F. Optimizing UAV systems for rapid survey and
      reconstruction of large scale cultural heritage sites. In Proceedings of Digital Heritage, Granada, Spain, 28
      September–2 October 2015.
13.   Themistocleous, K.; Ioannides, M.; Agapiou, A.; Hadjimitsis, D.G. The methodology of documenting cultural
      heritage sites using photogrammetry, UAV, and 3D printing techniques: The case study of Asinou church in
      Cyprus. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Remote Sensing and Geoinformation of the
      Environment, Paphos, Cyprus, 16–19 March 2015.
14.   Xu, Z.; Wu, L.; Shen, Y.; Li, F.; Wang, Q.; Wang, R. Tridimensional reconstruction applied to cultural heritage
      with the use of camera-equipped UAV and terrestrial laser scanner. Remote Sens. 2014, 6, 10413–10434.
      [CrossRef]
15.   Nister, D. Automatic passive recovery of 3D from images and video. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
      Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization and Transmission, Thessaloniki, Greece, 6–9 September
      2004; pp. 438–445.
16.   Pollefeys, M.; Van Gool, L.; Vergauwen, M.; Verbiest, F.; Cornelis, K.; Tops, J.; Koch, R. Visual modeling with
      a hand-held camera. Int. J. Comput. Vision 2004, 59, 207–232. [CrossRef]
17.   Yastikli, N. Documentation of cultural heritage using digital photogrammetry and laser scanning. J. Cult.
      Herit. 2007, 8, 423–427. [CrossRef]
18.   Serna, C.G.; Pillay, R.; Trémeau, A. Data fusion of objects using techniques such as Laser Scanning, Structured
      Light and Photogrammetry for Cultural Heritage Applications. In Computational Color Imaging; Springer
      International Publishing: Basel, Switzerland, 2015; pp. 208–224.
19.   Markiewicz, J.S.; Podlasiak, P.; Zawieska, D. A new approach to the generation of orthoimages of cultural
      heritage objects—integrating TLS and image data. Remote Sens. 2015, 7, 16963–16985. [CrossRef]
20.   Remondino, F.; Spera, M.G.; Nocerino, E.; Menna, F.; Nex, F. State of the art in high density image matching.
      Photogramm. Rec. 2014, 29, 144–166. [CrossRef]
21.   Rinaudo, F.; Chiabrando, F.; Nex, F.; Piatti, D. New instruments and technologies for cultural heritage
      survey: Full integration between point clouds and digital photogrammetry. In Digital Heritage; Springer:
      Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 56–70.
22.   Akbarzadeh, A.; Frahm, J.M.; Mordohai, P.; Clipp, B.; Engels, C.; Gallup, D.; Wang, L. Towards urban 3D
      reconstruction from video. In Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on 3D Data Processing,
      Visualization, and Transmission, Chapel Hill, NC, USA, 14–16 June 2006.
23.   Förstner, W. Computer Vision and Photogrammetry—Mutual Questions: Geometry, Statistics and Cognition.
      In Bildteknik/Image Science, Swedish Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing; 2002; pp. 151–164.
24.   Musialski, P.; Wonka, P.; Aliaga, D.G.; Wimmer, M.; Gool, L.; Purgathofer, W. A survey of urban
      reconstruction. Comput. Graph. Forum 2013, 32, 146–177. [CrossRef]
25.   Lisini, G.; Tison, C.; Tupin, F.; Gamba, P. Feature fusion to improve road network extraction in high-resolution
      SAR images. IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett. 2006, 3, 217–221. [CrossRef]
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                            13 of 15



26.   Teo, T.A.; Rau, J.Y.; Chen, L.C.; Liu, J.K.; Hsu, W.C. Reconstruction of complex buildings using LIDAR and
      2D maps. In Innovations in 3D Geo Information Systems (Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography);
      Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2006; pp. 345–354.
27.   Roenholm, P.; Honkavaara, E.; Litkey, P.; Hyyppä, H.; Hyyppä, J. Integration of laser scanning and
      photogrammetry. In Proceedings of the ISPRS Workshop on Laser Scanning 2007 and SilviLaser 2007,
      Espoo, Finland, 12–14 September 2007; pp. 355–362.
28.   Stamos, I.; Liu, L.; Chen, C.; Wolberg, G.; Yu, G.; Zokai, S. Integrating automated range registration with
      multiview geometry for the photorealistic modelling of large-scale scenes. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2008, 78,
      237–260. [CrossRef]
29.   Gonzalez-Aguilera, D.; Muñoz-Nieto, A.; Rodriguez-Gonzalvez, P.; Menéndez, M. New tools for rock art
      modelling: Automated sensor integration in Pindal Cave. J. Archaeol. Sci. 2011, 38, 120–128. [CrossRef]
30.   Kim, H.; Sarim, M.; Takai, T.; Guillemaut, J.Y.; Hilton, A. Dynamic 3D scene reconstruction in outdoor
      environments. In Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on 3D Data Processing and Visualization, Paris,
      France, 17–20 May 2010.
31.   Kim, H.; Hilton, A. 3D scene reconstruction from multiple spherical stereo pairs. Int. J. Comput. Vision 2013,
      104, 94–116. [CrossRef]
32.   Luhmann, T.; Tecklenburg, W. 3-D object reconstruction from multiple-station panorama imagery. ISPRS
      Arch. 2004, 34, 8.
33.   Parian, J.A.; Gruen, A. An advanced sensor model for panoramic cameras. In Proceedings of the XXth ISPRS
      Congress, Istanbul, Turkey, 12–23 July 2004; pp. 24–29.
34.   Schneider, D.; Maas, H.G. Development and application of an extended geometric model for high resolution
      panoramic cameras. In Proceedings of the XXth ISPRS Congress, International Archives of Photogrammetry,
      Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey, 12–23 July 2004.
35.   Schneider, D.; Maas, H.G. Combined bundle adjustment of panoramic and central perspective images.
      ISPRS Arch. 2005, 36, 4.
36.   Barazzetti, L.; Fangi, G.; Remondino, F.; Scaioni, M. Automation in multi-image spherical photogrammetry
      for 3D architectural reconstructions. In Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium on Virtual Reality,
      Archaeology and Cultural Heritage (VAST), Paris, France, 21–24 September 2010.
37.   Fangi, G. Investigation on the suitability of the spherical panoramas by Realviz Stitcher for metric purposes.
      ISPRS Arch. 2006, 5, 372–376.
38.   Fangi, G.; Clini, P.; Fiori, F. Simple and quick digital technique for the safeguard of Cultural Heritage.
      The Rustem Pasha Mosque in Istanbul. In Proceedings of the Digital Media and its Application in Cultural
      Heritage, Amman, Jordan, 5–6 November 2008; pp. 209–217.
39.   Fangi, G. Further developments of the spherical photogrammetry for cultural heritage. In Proceedings of the
      XXII CIPA Symposium, Kyoto, Japan, 11–15 October 2009; pp. 11–15.
40.   Fangi, G. The multi-image spherical panoramas as a tool for architectural survey. In Proceedings of the 21st
      CIPA symposium, Athens, Greece, 1–6 October 2007.
41.   Guarnieri, A.; Vettore, A.; Remondino, F.; Church, O.P. Photogrammetry and ground-based laser scanning:
      Assessment of metric accuracy of the 3D model of Pozzoveggiani church. In Proceedings of the Fig Working
      Week: The Olympic Spirit of Surveying, Athens, Greece, 22–27 May 2004.
42.   Pensieri, C.; Pennacchini, M. Virtual reality in medicine. In Handbook on 3D3C Platforms; Springer
      International Publishing: Basel, Switzerland, 2016; pp. 353–401.
43.   Portman, M.E.; Natapov, A.; Fisher-Gewirtzman, D. To go where no man has gone before: Virtual reality in
      architecture, landscape architecture and environmental planning. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2015, 54,
      376–384. [CrossRef]
44.   Ong, S.K.; Nee, A.Y.C. Virtual and Augmented Reality Applications in Manufacturing; Springer Science &
      Business Media: Berlin, Germany, 2013.
45.   Kaimaris, D.; Stylianidis, E.; Karanikolas, N. Virtual reality: Developing a VR space for academic activities.
      ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial Inf. Sci. 2014, 2, 197–201. [CrossRef]
46.   Guarnieri, A.; Pirotti, F.; Vettore, A. An open source application for interactive exploration of cultural heritage
      3D models on the web. In Proceedings of the 3D Virtual Reconstruction and Visualization of Complex
      Architectures, Trento, Italy, 25–28 February 2009.
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                        14 of 15



47.   Guarnieri, A.; PirDotti, F.; Vettore, A. Cultural heritage interactive 3D models on the web: An approach
      using open source and free software. J. Cult. Herit. 2010, 11, 350–353. [CrossRef]
48.   Maldzanski, P. Development of Methods for Capturing and Processing Data in Architectural Photogrammetry;
      UACEG: Sofia, Bulgaria, 2012 (source in Bulgarian).
49.   Koeva, M. 3D Modelling in Architectural Photogrammetry; UACG: Sofia, Bulgaria, 2015 (source in Bulgarian).
50.   Koeva, M.N. 3D modelling and interactive web-based visualization of cultural heritage objects.
      In Proceedings of the Conference ISPRS-International Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
      Spatial Information Sciences, Lausanne, Switzerland, 10–12 February 2016.
51.   Gaitatzes, A.; Christopoulos, D.; Roussou, M. Reviving the past: Cultural heritage meets virtual reality.
      In Proceedings of the Conference on Virtual Reality, Archeology, and Cultural Heritage, Athens, Greece,
      28–30 November 2001.
52.   Vlahakis, V.; Karigiannis, J.; Tsotros, M.; Gounaris, M.; Almeida, L.; Stricker, D.; Ioannidis, N. Archeoguide:
      first results of an augmented reality, mobile computing system in cultural heritage sites. In Proceedings of
      the Conference on Virtual Reality, Archeology, and Cultural Heritage, Athens, Greece, 28–30 November 2001.
53.   Bruno, F.; Bruno, S.; De Sensi, G.; Luchi, M.L.; Mancuso, S.; Muzzupappa, M. From 3D reconstruction to
      virtual reality: A complete methodology for digital archaeological exhibition. J. Cult. Herit. 2010, 11, 42–49.
      [CrossRef]
54.   Kalay, Y.; Kvan, T.; Affleck, J. New Heritage: New Media and Cultural Heritage; Taylor & Francis: Park Drive,
      UK, 2007.
55.   Reffat, R.M.; Nofal, E.M. Effective Communication with Cultural Heritage using Virtual Technologies.
      In Proceedings of the XXIV International CIPA Symposium, Strasbourg, France, 2–6 September 2013.
56.   Zara, J. Virtual reality and cultural heritage on the web. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference
      on Computer Graphics and Artificial Intelligence, Limoges, France, 12–13 May 2004.
57.   Hadjikolev, E.; Vragov, G.; Totkov, G.; Ivanova, K. Regatta–regional aggregator of heterogeneous cultural
      artefacts. In Review of the National Center for Digitization; Faculty of Mathematics: Belgrade, Serbia, 2012;
      pp. 8–18.
58.   Guarnaccia, M.; Gambino, O.; Pirrone, R.; Ardizzone, E. An Explorable Immersive Panorama. In Proceedings
      of the 6th International Conference on Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems, Palermo, Italy,
      4–6 July 2012; pp. 130–134.
59.   Ippoliti, E.; Calvano, M.; Mores, L. 2.5 D/3D Models for the enhancement of architectural-urban heritage.
      A Virtual Tour of design of the Fascist headquarters in Littoria. ISPRS Ann. Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spatial
      Inf. Sci. 2014, 2, 189–196. [CrossRef]
60.   Louvre Virtual Museum. Available online: http://www.youvisit.com/tour/louvremuseum (accessed on
      8 April 2017).
61.   Wahbeh, W. Architectural Digital Photogrammetry: Panoramic Image-Based Interactive Modelling.
      Ph.D. Thesis, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2011.
62.   Snyder, J.P. Flattening the Earth: Two Thousand Years of Map Projections; The University of Chicago Press:
      Chicago, IL, USA, 1993; p. 384.
63.   Fangi, G.; Nardinocchi, C. Photogrammetric processing of spherical Panoramas. The Photogramm. Rec. 2013,
      28, 293–311. [CrossRef]
64.   Highton, S. Virtual Reality Photography: Creating Panoramic and Object Images; Virtual Reality Photography:
      San Carlos, CA, USA, 2010.
65.   Easypano Holdings Inc. Available online: http://www.easypano.com/ (accessed on 8 April 2017).
66.   Zlateva, M.; Zlateva, A. Bulgarian Cultural Heritage: Interpretation and Presentation. Problems and
      Prospects. Available online: http://www.arcchip.cz/w05/w05_zlateva.pdf (accessed on 8 April 2017).
67.   Phase One. Capture One 7. Available online: https://www.phaseone.com/en/Products/Software/Capture-
      One-Pro/Highlights.aspx (accessed on 8 April 2017).
68.   Adobe Systems Incorporated. Adobe Photoshop CC. Available online: http://www.adobe.com/products/
      photoshop.html (accessed on 8 April 2017).
69.   New House Internet Services B.V. PTGui. Available online: https://www.ptgui.com (accessed on
      8 April 2017).
70.   Virtual Tour Lovech. Available online: http://regtour.lovech.bg/lovech_eng/index.html (accessed on
      8 April 2017).
Sensors 2017, 17, 829                                                                                      15 of 15



71.   Fangi, G. Multi scale, multiresolution spherical photogrammetry with long focal lenses for architectural
      surveys. ISPRS Arch. 2010, 38, 1–6.
72.   Karras, G.E.; Patias, P.; Petsa, E. Digital monoplotting and photo-unwrapping of developable surfaces in
      architectural photogrammetry. Int. Arch. Photogramm. Remote Sens. 1996, 31, 290–294.
73.   D Print ProJet. Available online: http://www.3dprint-Bg.Com/Index.Php (accessed on 8 April 2017).
74.   Kersten, T.P.; Lindstaedt, M. Image-based low-cost systems for automatic 3D recording and modelling of
      archaeological finds and objects. In Progress in Cultural Heritage Preservation; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
      Germany, 2012; pp. 1–10.
75.   D’Annibale, E. Image Based Modeling from Spherical Photogrammetry and Structure for Motion. The Case
      of the Treasury, Nabatean Architecture in Petra. Geoinformatics FCE CTU 2011, 6, 62–73. [CrossRef]
76.   Groat, L.N.; Wang, D. Architectural Research Methods; John Wiley & Sons: New York, NY, USA, 2002.
77.   Brown, M.; Lowe, D.G. Automatic panoramic image stitching using invariant features. Int. J. Comput. Vision
      2007, 74, 59–73. [CrossRef]
78.   García-Gago, J.; González-Aguilera, D.; Gómez-Lahoz, J.; San José-Alonso, J.I. A photogrammetric and
      computer vision-based approach for automated 3D architectural modeling and its typological analysis.
      Remote Sens. 2014, 6, 5671–5691. [CrossRef]
79.   Shum, H.Y.; Szeliski, R. Creating full view panoramic image mosaics and environment maps. In Proceedings
      of the 24th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, Los Angeles, CA, USA,
      3–8 August 1997; pp. 251–258.
80.   Shum, H.Y.; Szeliski, R. Systems and Experiment Paper: Construction of Panoramic Image Mosaics with
      Global and Local Alignment. Int. J. Comput. Vision 2000, 36, 101–130. [CrossRef]
81.   Wahbeh, W. Architectural Digital Photogrammetry: Panoramic Image-Based Interactive Modelling.
      Ph.D. Thesis, University Sapienza of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2011.
82.   D’Annibale, E.; Fangi, G. Interactive modelling by projection of oriented spherical panorama. In Proceedings
      of the ISPRS International Workshop on 3D Virtual Reconstruction and Visualization of Comprex
      Architectures (3D-Arch’2009), Trento, Italy, 25–29 February 2009.
83.   Pramulyo, H.; Harto, A.B.; Mertotaroeno, S.H.; Murtiyoso, A. Towards better 3D model accuracy with
      spherical photogrammetry. In The Rise of Big Spatial Data; Springer International Publishing: Basel,
      Switzerland, 2017; pp. 107–120.
84.   Gledhill, D.; Tian, G.Y.; Taylor, D.; Clarke, D. Panoramic imaging—A review. Comput. Graph. 2003, 27,
      435–445. [CrossRef]
85.   Nodal Ninja, 2005-2013, Fanotec Spherical Panoramic Tripod Head NN5 & NN5L Manual. Available online:
      http://www.nodalninja.com/manuals/nn5_user_manual.pdf (accessed on 8 April 2017).

                        © 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                        article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                        (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
